in  this issue 

ESSAY 
That Interactive Thing You  Do 
Mic/we/ P.  Peterso11 

FEATURED ARTICLES 
Beyond Graduated Circles: Varied Point Symbols for 
Representing Quantitative Data on Maps 
Cy11thia  A. Brewer and A11drew /. Campbell 

3 

6 

Animation-Based Map Design: The Visual Effects of 
Interpolation on the Appearance of Three-Dimensional Surfaces 
Steplre11  Lm1i11, So11ja  Ross11111, a11d  Slraw11  R.  Slade 

26 

Decision-Making w ith Conflicting Cartographi c Information: 
The Case of Groundwater Vulnerabi lity Maps 
Clwr/es P.  Rader and f a111es O. f anke 

REVIEWS 
The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care 
Russell 5.  Kirby 

Mapping an Empire: The Geographical Construction of 
British India, 1765-1843 
W.  Eliznbetli fepson 

Atlas of Oregon Wildlife:  Distribution, Habitat, and Na tural 
History 
James  E.  Meacl1m11 

CARTOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUES 

MAP LIBRARY BULLETIN  BOARD 

NACISNEWS 

35 

48 

49 

51 

53 

57 

59 

~ tnessages 

- ~ ---

MESSAGE FROM NACIS' 
PRESIDENT 

It is a pleasure to serve as the 1997-
98 president of NACIS.  No, really, 
I am serious!  (as Dave Barry would 
say). After well over a decade of 
association with the organization, 
serving now and then as a member 
of the board of d irectors or the CP 
editorial board, I finally have the 
pleasure of serving as NACIS'  vice 
president and now president. The 
words "pleasure" and "president" 
are seldom found together in the 
same sentence; let me te ll you why 
I use them together. 

For one thing, I get to deliver 
some good news to NACIS mem 
bers and others with links to 
cartography: we have a new editor 
for Cartogrnplric PcrspectitJes. After a 
two-year search and several guest 
editors, we found our new editor, 
Dr. Michael Peterson of the Uni 
versity of Nebraska-Omaha, right 
at the-head of our own editorial 

(conti1111ed  Oil  page 61) 

NEW NACIS WEB  SITE 
www .nacis.org 

cartographic  perspectives 

journal of the 
North American Cartographic Information Society 

Editor 
Dr. Miclwel P. Peterson 
Dept. of Geography & Ceo logy 
Universitv of \Jebraska-Omaha 
Omaha, NE 68182-0199 
( 402) 554-4805 
fax:  (402) 554-3518 
email: geolib@n-vis.unomaha.edu 

Assist1111t Editor 
Tames R. Anderson, Jr. 
FREAC 
Florida State University 
Tallahassee, FL 32306-2641 
(850) 644-2883 
fax:  (850) 644-7360 
e-mail: jandcrso@maikr.fsu.edu 

Hook  Rcuic<t' [ditor 
Joanne M. Perry 
Map Librarian 
Information Services 
Oregon State University 
121  Tlw Valley Library 
Corvallis, OR 97:Bl -4501 
(541)737-2971  fax:  (541 )737-3433 
perryj@ccmai l .orst .ed u 

Cartogmpltic Tcclt11iq11c~ Editor 
James E. Meaclrnm 
Director, lnfoGraphics Lab 
Departnwnt of Geography 
Cnivcrsity of Oregon 
Eugene, OR 97403-1251 
(541 )346-4870  fax:  (541 )346-2067 
jmeacham@tiregon.uoregon.edu 

i\!111p  Library H11/lcti11  Hc111nl 
[di/or 
Melissa L.amont 
Data Libran· 
l'vlclean I .,1boratorv 
Woods Hole ( kL•anographic 
Institution 
WHO! \fail Stop 8 
Woods Holl',  MA 02:143 
(508)289-3396  fax:  (508)457-2183 
mlamont@whoi.edu 

ISSN  I 048-9085 
Cartographic f'erspecti Vl'S 
is pub I islwd t ri an nu a 11 ~· 

Cartographic Perspectives 
EDITORIAL BOARD 

about the cover 

Barbara Buttenfield 
University of Colorado 

Jim Merchant 
Univ. of Nebraska - Lincoln 

Gregory Chu 
Univ. of Wisconsin - La Crosse 

Mark Monmonier 
Syracuse University 

Jeremy Crampton 
George Mason University 

Judy Olson 
Michigan State University 

Borden Dent 
Georgia State University 

Jeffrey Patton 
Univ. of N. Carolina - Greensboro 

Scott Freundschuh 
Univ. of Minnesota - Duluth 

Joe Poracsky 
Portland State University 

Melissa Lamont 
Woods Hole Oceanographic 
Institution 

Ren  V asiliev 
State Univ. of New York College 
at Geneseo 

Matthew McGranagha11 
University of Hawaii - Manoa 

Carolyn Weiss 
Statistics Canada 

----- - -- - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - -- - --

-

-

-

J 
~ 

I 

About the Cover: 

The cover was designed by James 
Swanson using Adobe Photoshop on a 
Power Macintosh.  James is currently 
finishing his master's degree at the 
University of Nebraska at Omaha. His 
thesis concerns the cartographic 
applications of the Virtual Reality 
Modeling Language (VRML). VRML is 
the Internet standard for the description 
of interactive 30 objects and scenes. 

Across the top of the cover, a series 
of prism maps show the change in US 
income per capita from 1948 to 1970.  In 
the lower-right is a wire-frame of the 
extruded states from the VRML map. 
The stripe down the middle of the page 
represents a binary data stream with 
ones and zeroes.  Towards the bottom 
left is a portion of the source code for the  I 
VRML map.  Th.is VRML 'world' can be 
accessed at 

http:/ / osprey.itd.sterling.com I vrml. J 

Number 29,  Winter 1998 

cartographic perspectives 

3 

Michael  P  Peterson 
Dep t.  of Geography/Geology 
Un iv.  of Nebraska  at Omaha 
Omaha,  NE  68182 

essay 

That Interactive Thing You Do 

The incorporation of interaction in the display of maps may be viewed 
as a major accomplishment of the computer-era in cartography. 
Certainly, interaction has pervaded all forms of mapping, whether it is 
with a database of a geographic information system, a multimedia atlas on 
a CD-RO:vt:, or street maps on the World Wide Web. A characteristic 
shared by all  of these forms of mapping is the control that the user has 
over the resultant map. 

However, interactivity is not new in cartography. In  fact,  it may be as 
old  as cartography itself.  While \.Ve  don' t know when  the first map was 
made, it was very likely a product of an interaction between two individu 
als.  It may have been much like the "paper-nap kin  map" of today- the 
kind of map that is drawn on any piece of scrap paper when words fail as 
one tries to explain where something is located. A common characteristic 
of these maps is that the person for whom the map is being made wi ll ask 
questions that affect how the map is drawn. For example, the person 
might ask where a particular landmark is located to provide a point of 
refe rence. The map becomes a  product of interactio n when the maker of 
the map includes the landma rk. It is likely that the first m ap was a product 
of this type of interaction. 

If the first maps were interacti ve, what does this mean about cartogra 
phy now? One way to a nswer this is to view the progression of cartogra 
phy in three stages. The initial  maps were interactive, perhaps drawn in 
sand \Vith a stick. A major shift occurred long ago as a more stable me 
d ium was used and maps were transformed  into static objects, first on clay 
and later on paper. This was an important transition because it mad e the 
communication of spatial inform ation possible  without the mapmaker 
ha ving to be present. H owever, it removed the interactive component. 
With the help of GIS,  multimedi a and the web, cartogra phy, now in its 
third stage, is becoming interactive again. 

The first and  third stages are both interactive, but diffe r in how the 
interaction is achieved - human vs. computer. What do we call the inter 
vening period? In geology, the time period in which we live is commonly 
referred to as an " interglacial," i.e., the time be tween major glacial events . 
In a similar sense, cartograph y may be seen as having been in an 
"interinteractive"  period - a period when static maps were the norm. The 
ice is still  melting  from this period. 

The transition to interactive maps is a difficult one for those accus 
tomed to static representations . A "paper-thinking" envelopes us.  It is a 
type of thinking that is difficult to overcome because we have been 
influenced by static m ap s for such a long period. It is the way we think 
maps should be. It is the way we have come to know the world. 

We should  remember that w hil e we have adapted  to static maps, many 

people have not. A large percentage of the popu lation cannot effectively 
use these maps. They apparently do  not find  that the information is 
presented in a usable form. The one million dail y hits on interactive 
mapping services like MapQuest are an indication  that interacti ve maps 
are much more accessible to  many people. While we might criticize the 
poor graphic q uality of these maps, people seem to use them . 

4 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29,  Winter 1998 

How can interactive maps be made better? A conversation is a good 
metaphor to use in understanding what interaction means with a map. An 
important aspect of a good conversation is that each participant responds 
in some way to what the other has said. A bad conversation is character 
ized by no response, a response that has nothing to do with the topic of the 
conversation, or does not relate to the previous point that was made. 
An additional and important aspect of a conversation is that each 
participant is building up a database of what the other has said. The 
database can be fairly sophisticated at times. For example, I can remember 
stories that people have told me several years ago (although they have 
sometimes forgotten that they have already told me these stories - a  flaw 
in their 'who-have-I-told-this-to' database). We have not reached this 
stage of sophistication in interactive cartography. The system rarely 
remembers what it has already shown. (The closest we get to this is the 
short-term caching structure of a World Wide Web browser.) 

Viewed in the perspective of a conversation, the type of interaction that 

we have with maps on the computer is simplistic. It is somewhat like 
talking to a person for the first time over and over again. There is no 
database of the interaction. The computer doesn't remember anything. 
Because it doesn' t remember, it cannot raise the sophistication of the 
interaction. 

Perhaps the conversational form of interaction with maps is not we 

want. Imagine if the computer responded with messages like: 

•  I' ve made this map for you before! 
•  Don' t you remember where that feature is located! 
• Can we move to a more intelligent level of interaction, please? 
We apparently prefer a more shallovv form of interaction with the 
computer. Perhaps we want to maintain the status of a master. We cer 
tainly don't want the computer to challenge us as another person might 
do. 

Some computer games incorporate varying levels of sophistication. 
They adapt to a particular user and move them forward to more compli 
cated tasks with rewards along the way. This, and the very high level of 
interaction that characterizes these games, maintain the interest of the 
user. The user is made to feel part of the game. The interactive map can 
create the same feeling on the part of the user. 

How far we have come from that first interactive map? It might be said 
that with all of our computers and technology, we still cannot simulate the 
interaction in a "paper-napkin" map. We may be making more accurate 
maps and maps that are the result of greater analytical thought, but they 
may not be as interactive as that first map in the sand. 

The Society 
North American Cartogaphic 
Information Society 
AGS Collection, P.O. 399 
Milwaukee, WI  53201 
voke: 414-229-6282 
voice: 800-558-8993 
fax:  414-229-3624 
cmb@uwm.edu 

Contact for information 
concerning: 

NACIS XVIII Program 
Cynthia Brewer 
Department of Geography 
302 Walker Building 
Pennsylvania State Univ. 
University Park, PA 16802 
voice: 814-865-5072 
fax:  814-863-7943 
c brewer@essc.psu.edu 

Poster Session 
Donna Schenstrom 
Dept. of Geography 
Univ. of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 
Milwaukee, WI 53201 
voice: 414-229-4865 
fax: 414-229-3981 
dgs@uwm.edu 

Number 29,  Winter 1998 

cartographic perspectives 

5 

The NACIS Program Committee invites you to participate in this 
meeting by presenting a paper, poster or exhibit.  Plan to organize a 
session, panel discussion, or workshop.  A full  range of computing 
facil ities a t the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee will be available 
for workshops.  We look. forward to featuring the current challenges 
confronting map librarians and cartographers. 

Potential topics include: 

-7  handling digital map-library data 

-7  compiling metadata 

-7  managing the practical constraints of budgets 

-7  exploring data using visualization  &  virtual 

reality 

-7 integrating diverse data sources for map 

production 

-7  marketing cartography services 

-7  developing educational materials 

We a lso encourage presentations that w ill complement the sympo 
sium Maps a11d Mi11ds: A History of Cartography i11  Geography 
Ed11catio11,  which has been organized by the Hermon Dunlap Smith 
Center for the History of Cartography,  :\lewberry Library. This 
symposium is co-sponsored by NACIS and will be held  in 
Milwaukee on Wednesday, October 7.  To continue themes from the 
symposium at l'\ACIS, we welcome presentations on maps in 
education and on cartographic ed ucation from historical, current 
and speculative perspectives.  Challenges that reflect the practical 
side of this topic include production of maps fo r educational media 
and collaboration with authors.  Topics on maps and society will 
also mesh wi th the symposium themes. 

Email your 250-word abstract or proposal to the program chair, 
Cynthia Brewer, by May 1.  List names and affili ations of all authors, 
and include phone and email for the presenting author.  We encour 
age student participation. 

XVIII 
ANNUAL MEETING 

NORTH 

AMERICAN 

CARTOGRAPHIC 

INFORMATION 

SOCIETY 

OCTOBER  7-10, 1998 

MILWAUKEE, 

WISCONSIN 

Email proposals and abstracts to: 
c brewer@essc.ps u.ed u 
The deadline is May 1 (Space may still be 
available after the deadline). 

Participants will be notified by June 15, 1998, 
of acceptance of their abstract or proposal. 

6 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

Cynthia A.  Brewer 
Department of Geography 
Pe11nsylz1a11ia  State  University 
U11iversity Park, PA 16802 

Andrew J.  Campbell 
Vance Air Force Base 
E11 id,  OK 73705 

INTRODUCTION 

" ... graduated point symbols 
were the most co111 111on 
quantitative sy111bolizntio11 
choice." 

Beyond Graduated Circles: 
Varied Point Symbols for Representing 
Quantitative Data on Maps 

Graduated point symbols are viewed as an appropriate choice for many 
thematic maps of data associated with point locations. Areal quantitative 
data, reported by such enumeration units as countries, are frequently 
presented with choropleth maps but are also well suited to point symbol 
representations. Our objective is to provide an ordered set of examples 
of the many point-symbol forms used on maps by showing symbols with 
linear, areal, and volumetric scaling on repeated small maps of the same 
data set. Bivariate point symbols are also demonstrated with emphasis 
on the distinction between symbols appropriate for comparison (sepa 
rate symbols) and those appropriate for proportional relationships 
(segmented symbols). In this paper, the variety of point symbol use is 
described, organized, and encourage, as is research on these varied 
symbols and their multivariate forms. 

M uch cartographic research has been conducted on appa ren t-value 

scaling and perceptions of graduated point symbols. However, 

discussion of practical subjective elements of point symbol design and 
construction is limited, especially for the wide variety of point symbols for 
representing multivariate relationships that are now feasib le with modern 
computing and output. The p rimary pu rpose of the paper is to suggest 
innovative graduated symbol designs and to examine useful combinations 
for comparing va riables and representing proportional relationships. This 
paper was inspired by  the bivariate symbol designs of hundreds of 
students that have taken introductory cartography courses with Cindy 
Brewer (at San  Diego Sta te and Penn State). These students have been 
creative and thoughtful in  the many ways they have found to rep resent 
multivariate map data, with few choosing the old standby of graduated 
circles when given  the flexible design capabilities of the illustration 
software. 

Although  thematic atlases have long made use of a wide variety of 
point symbols, cartography textbooks emphasize use of graduated circles. 
Mersey (1 996) surveyed  the qualitative and quantita tive point symbols 
used in eight recently published atlases and found that graduated point 
symbols were the most common quantitative symbolization choice (36 
percent; \·vi th 59 percent o f 36 being ci rcles or sectored circles). In compa ri 
son, choropleth maps were used  for 24 percent of the quantitative repre 
sentations. Mersey notes that, d espite the prevalence of point symbol 
mapping, choropleth  maps are the mainstay of most microcomputer 
bascd GIS programs. All of the 13 she reviewed offered choropleth map 
ping, with four of the 13 not able to produce graduated symbol representa 
tions. Muehrcke (1996),  citing Able r (1987),  refers to choropleth mapping 
as "a cartographic abomi nation  that GIS will sv:iftly kill off" (p. 272) and 
then bemoans its continued  use. Although GIS has enabled production of 
more sophisticated  representations, it has also made it easier (for far more 
people) to produce choropleth maps as well. 

Cartograms and dasymetric mapping offer alternatives to choropleth 
mapping, but here the more popular point symbol representations will be 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

7 

examined. Point symbols are appropriate for quantitative data at point 
locations and for areal units. They are not affected by the physical size of 
enumeration units (large units produce large symbols on choropleth 
maps) and can be used to illustrate a spatial distribution while maintain 
ing recognizable geographic boundaries (unlike contiguous cartograms). 
Widely spaced point symbols in  regions of large enumeration units (such 
as counties of the western U.S.) produce the appropriate sense of sparse 
data and they contrast well with dense clusters of symbols in areas of 
small units (such as eastern U.S. counties). Thus, point symbols preserve 
the spatial structure of the entire map without the problems associated 
vv·ith  choropleth maps or cartograms. 

The paper begins with a review of literature on graduated symbols to 

update the reader on this long research tradition in cartography and 
psychology. The remainder of the paper is devoted to a description of the 
v<iriety of symbol designs possible and the nuances in  symbol designs that 
make them appropriate for different types of bi\'ariate map data. A wide 
\'ariety of symbols are illustrated with the hope that these examples •.vill 
inspire and encourage the authors of maps and GIS displavs to produce a 
wider ,·ariety of engaging and enlightening data displays well-suited to 
communicating and exploring their geographic information. 

Psychopl1ysicnl Study of Grad1wted Circles 
Apparent-\·alue scaling and graduated circles ha,·e received a great deal of 
attention from cartographic researchers. The circle was, and still is,  the 
most widely used graduated point symbol. Flannery's 1956 and 1971  '"·ork 
firmly established apparent-value scaling as a topic of research and 
discussion for the cartographic community. 

Co' (1976) concluded that apparent \'alue sc,1ling " ...  turned out to be 
inadequate as a  remedy for the underestimation of symbol size ratios"  (p. 
73).  His research examined legend construction and anchor effects associ 
ated with circle and square size estimation. He found  that using a legend 
containing a  small, mid-size, and large symbol (relative to the mapped 
data) led to the most accurate estimates. His findings supported Dobson 
( 197.+ ),  who stated "a review of psychophysical research on proportional 
circle symbols indicates that readers can interpolate between circle sizes 
but that extrapolation is quite difficult" (p. 53). Chang (!977) confirmed 
Co,' s findings with the results of a similar study comparing size estima 
tion using ratio and magnitude estimation methods. 

Macmillan et al.  (197-1),  Teghtsoonian (1965), Maddock and Crassini 

(1980), and Shortridge and Welch (1980) examined the effects of the 
specific wording of the request that subjects estimate circle magnitudes. 
The latter three e'periments were not entirely applicable to cartography 
because the standard for comparison needed to be remembered when 
estimations were made; \·vhereas normally the "standard''  would be 
simultaneously available in a  map legend . .\.1acmillan et al.  tested the use 
of instructions to subjects with a standard present during estimations. 
They found that instructions for use of a fitting strategy improved the 
accuracy of subjects' size judgments. 

By  the mid-1980s, authors became increasingly skeptical about the 
usefulness of apparent-value scaling and shifted research away from 
correction by exponen t.  Griffin (1985) was particularly critical of its 
usefulness, stating: 

Perceptual rescaling may ha,·e merits for particular types of map user, 
or for the gene ration of immediate visual  impressions, though both 
cases remain to be proven. Such rescaling pl<1ces  increased demands on 

LITERATURE REVIEW 

"Appnrrnt-value scnli11g and 
graduated circles /rnpe received a 
great deal of atte11tio11 fro111 
cartographic researchers." 

8 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

map space and, in the experimenta l context, promotes an increase in 
the variability of subject responses. (p. 35) 

In analyzing intra- versus inter-subject variation in circle size estima 
tion, Griffin pointed out the ineffectiveness of apparent-value scaling for 
increasing the estimation accuracy of subjects who performed poorly. He 
also noted that apparent-value scaling impaired those subjects whose 
estimates were most accurate. In contrast to Griffin's results, Olson's 
(1975) earlier work with circle-size and dot-density estimation examined 
the interaction between apparent-value scaling and training in the form of 
practice and feedback about correct answers (for commentary see Will 
iams, 1977, and Olson, 1978). She concluded that the combination im 
proves both the accuracy and dispersion of subject estimates, unlike 
results for either scaling or training alone. Assuming that a map legend 
functions as training in a limited way by providing example sizes with 
associated data values, apparent-value scaling may produce improvement 
in graduated-circle estimation for complete map-reading contexts that is 
not seen in simpler experimental contexts. 

Interactive and animated mapping facilitates examination of multiple 
symbol scalings. Slocum and Yoder (1996) described student use of Visual 
Basic to animate series of graduated-circle maps. One approach was to 
permit interactive selection of scaling values from  square-root areal 
scaling to linear scaling of diameters, which enhanced spatial pattern by 
greatly exaggerating relative circle areas. 

Heino (1991) noted that graded rather than graduated symbols may be 
the best method of displaying quantitative data on a map. Heino argued 
that since graduated point symbols were meant as visual abstractions, 
graded symbols sufficiently convey the intended message without creating 
the problems associated with graduated symbol perception. Dent (1996) 
also discussed ra nge-graded circles in his textbook. His discussion in 
cluded Meihoefer's (1969) ten circle sizes that were "consistently discrimi 
nated by his subjects"  (Dent, p. 174) as well as his own untested set of 
graded circles. Similarly, Monmonier ( 1977) recommended a regression 
based method of circle scaling intended to improve visual correlations 
between maps by essentially imposing a shared minimum and maximum 
circle size on the data representations of two (or more) maps to be com 
pared. His approach to scaling permitted accurate value estimations from 
legend examples, but correct size ratios between symbols were not main 
tained. 

This shift in  research away from apparent scaling was supported by 
authors such as Worth (1989) who discussed, as Flannery had, some of the 
problems with approaching cartographic research as a pure science. He 
noted that much cartographic research borrows from  psychology because 
both fields are highly subjective, and stated that, "By their very nature, 
experimental tests in cartography must involve many subjective decisions, 
and although we must do our best to apply the scientific method, subjec 
tivity will always be invoh·ed" (p. 152). 

Petchenik (1983) offered an in-depth discussion of cartographic research 

and the problems associated with limiting ourselves to psychophysical 
study. She explained that much psychophysical study eliminates spatial 
structure from our perception of thematic figures, and quoted Chang 
(1980) who stated, "The stimu lus-response relationship for circles is fairly 
complex, and any correction in  map design based on one psychophysical 
study alone is of limited value, especially given the incomparability 
between the conditions of the experiment and of real map use" (p. 161 ). 
There have been calls for more cognitive research to counter the limita-

" ... 111uch psychophysical study 
eliminates spatial structllre 
from  our perception of thematic 
figures  .. . " 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

9 

tions of psychophysical research in cartography (Olson 1979; Fraczek 
1984), and Gilmartin (1981a) discussed  the inextricable link between 
cogniti ve and psychophysical study. Peterson (1985, 1987) examined 
mental images of maps and comparison of pattterns on point symbol 
maps, rather than comparison of symbo ls.  MacEachren's How Maps  Work 
(1995) is a current, in-depth analysis of human cognitive processes used  to 
understand map symbols and map patterns. 

Beyond Circle Size Estimation 

Groop and Cole (1978) studied the relative effectiveness of cut-out 
versus overlapping graduated circles, s ince many graduated circle maps 
include dense clusters of circles. Their analysis showed that estimation 
errors associated with cut-out circles were significantl y g rea ter than those 
associated \v i th overlapping circles. Cut-out circles are seldom used today 
because of the ease of constructing overlapping circles with the computer. 
However, Dent (1996) noted that they "add a three-dimensional (plastic) 
quality to  the map" (p. 177). Groop and Cole also qu estioned  the effects of 
clustering on the accuracy of size estimation. Gilmartin (198lb) found that 
circle size estimation was affected by neig hboring circles and that the 
effect can be minimized by including intervening linework such as bound 
aries separating enumeration units. Dent noted  the current lack of a 
solution to this problem. 

Researchers have examined  the effects of both lightness and hue on 
symbol-size estimation. Meihoefer (1973) studied  the effect of transparent, 
gray, and black circles on size estimation with his l 969 set of graded 
circles. He found  no difference in subject perception with these three fill 
va riations. Crawford (1971) concluded that the perception of circle size 
was the same whether the circles were represented in black or gray. Patton 
and Slocum (1985) conducted a stud y to assess the effect that aesthetic use 
of color had on pattern recall of graduated circles.  Lindenberg (1986) 
examined the effect of color on size estimation for graduated circles. 
Neither Patton and Slocum nor Lindenberg found differences associated 
with color, substantiating Meihoefer's and Crawford's studies. In contrast, 
Williams (1956) foun d small differences in size estimates between colored 
symbols (circles, squares, triangles) and black symbols of the same size, 
with the largest difference of six percent between equivalent yellow and 
black symbo ls. 

Griffin (] 990) recognized the increase in cognitive study of graduated 
symbol use, but suggested continued research using the stimulus-response 
approach . He investigated visua l contrast between gradua ted circles and 
their map background, user preference for opaque versus transparent 
circles, and the effect of varying circle fill color on size estimation . His 
subjects disliked a white fill most and showed a strong preference for 
black figures.  Preference results for opacity depended on a subject's 
preference for clarity of the figure or detail of the background. As in 
Crawford (1971),  Meihoefer (1973), Patton and Slocum (1985), and 
Lindenberg ( 1986), color variation was shmvn to have no effect on s ize 
estimation. 

Comparisons of Types of Graduated Symbo ls 

Unfortunately, little has been written by cartographers comparing the 
relative usefulness of different types of g rad uated point symbols. This lack 
stems, in  part, from the historical difficulty of manually constructing 
graduated symbols. Graduated circles were versatile and easy to construct 
through both manual and automated mea ns, and have, therefore, received 
greater attention. In addition, few resea rchers ha ve investigated  the 

" .. . color vnrintio11  wns shown 
to have 110 effect 011  size 
estimation. " 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

15 

..;_ 

,-

I 

I 

I 

, 
' 

I  ,,,,----

a.  Graduated 

Bars 

,!. 

I 

•..-... 

' t 

'-· 

I 
500  5000 

100 

b. Graduated 
Spikes 

' 

,,,,,--

• 
l 

! 

s:; 
-c 

"{; 

.,, 

.. 

t: 

' 

-·,,.• 

f.. 

~ 
__;;;.. 

s:; 
t:.  c 
"}':  r: 
t:  t: 
~ £ 
c  ~ 
r:  £  .. 
~  ~ r  t:: 
't::  r: 
er; 
r  r  r: 
- - -;'",-,> 

f.. 

.. 

~ 
.:. 

I 

... 

100  500  5000 

c.  Repeated 

Pictograms 

f.. 
t: 
t: 
t: 
t: 
t: 
c 
r: 
r: 
r: 

J;:, 

100 

500  5000 

Figure 3.  Lim•.u uni' ariate point symbols representing 1993 loan 
disbursement d;it;i: gr;iduated bars (a); graduated ~ pike~, formed 
by triangles with a constant base and height5 lincarlv scaled to 
data (b); and st;ick' of repeated p i ctogram~ (c). 

symbol. These valid variations a re not pursued because this paper has 
been limited to a manageable set of possibilities by focusing primarily on 
graduated symbol forms. 

Like Figure la, Figure 2a  is an areal table with the siLes of numbers 
graduated by their values. Graduated numbers offer the reader the accu 
racy of a  table with the advantage of a v isual representation of relative 
magnitudes. (T\'ote that Figure 2a is the only map w ith symbols  that 
represent debt in billions of dolla rs; Figure la and all  other map legends 
list debt in millions of dollars.) 

Traditional graduated circles and squares also work well with the 
disbursements data set (Figure 2b and c). Their familiarity and versatility 
make them mapping options that should not be overlooked. By sizing the 
height and width of the entire set of symbols by a  constant ratio, gradu 
ated ellipses (Figu re 2d) offer a mapping solution for sets of enumeration 

"Graduated m11nbers offer tile 
reader tile accuracy of a table 
with the advantage of a 7.'isual 
represe11tatio11 of relative 
111ng11 i t11des." 

16 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

a. Graduated 
Spheres 

100 

500 

b.  Graduated 
Cubes 

100 

c.  Block Piles 

100 

Fi:;:11n• .f.  \'olurnctric univariate point symbols  reprc,enting 1993 loan 
disbursement d;it,i: graduated spheres (ii), grnduated cubes (b), and 
bl<)CI-.  piles (c). Cube-root scaling is used to sLi:c the spheres and 
cubes, <111d  block piles are constrnctt>d by repeating the smallest cube 
symbol. 

units having generally elongated shapes. These 
ellipses are also included for comparison to a later 
bivariate use (Figure 6g). Magnitudes represented 
with a square grid (Figure 2e) may aid accurate 
interpretation because individual cells can be 
counted. 

Another areal symbol, the 'money bag' picto 

gram (Figure 2f) offers an example shape that 
more literally reflects the data, captures the 
reader's attention, and may be scaled to represent 
relative quantities. Pictograms are particularly 
well suited when 'catching' the reader's eye is a 
priority, making them common in magazines, 
newspapers, and educational material. The New 
Stnte of the World  Atlns (Kidron and Segal 1984) 
offers good examples of the unlimited possibilities 
of pictogram use. This atlas and later editions (for 
example, the fifth edition was published in  1995) 
use graded pictograms to cleverly illustrate 
everything from  radio receivers per 1000 people to 
worker exploitation rates. An example similar to 
that used in  Figure 2f can be found in the Atlns of 
Newfo1111dln11d n11d  Labrador (McManus et al. 1991, 
pl.  19). Although pictograms may not be well 
suited for accurate magnitude estimation, variety 
and ability to match the theme of the data being 
mapped make them a worthwhile consideration. 
Linearly-scaled symbols (Figure 3) work well 

for these data because of the relatively large 
enumeration units. The bars in Figure 3a overlap 
multiple e nume ration units and may be difficult to 
associate with the correct location. In contrast, the 
larger bases of the spikes in Figure 3b better 
associate the symbols w ith their enumeration 
units. Stacks of repeated pictograms (Figure 3c) 
offer a linearly-scaled version of p ictograms (a 
similar pictogram  is areally scaled in Figure 2£). 
Alternatively, scaling the height of a single tall 
pictogram for each enumeration unit is also 
appropriate. For mapping phenomena such as 
mercury in sediments, makers of The  Nntionnl Atlas 
of Sweden: The Em>iro11111e11t  (Bernes and Grundsten 
1992) use linearly-scaled graduated columns set on 
an oblique perspective projection of Sweden 
viewed from the east. This technique produces an 
interesting map and allows the uncluttered us e of 
linearly scaled bars that would be stacked atop one 
another in a more traditional planimetric view 
oriented to the north. 

Finally, volumetric symbols such as cubes and 
spheres (Figures 4a and b) are used for data with 
an extreme range and are relatively easy to con 
struct. Spheres can be rendered using a circle with 
a radial fill  and a shadow (Figure 4a). Cube 
construction is more challenging because of 
projection options (Mackay 1953; Ekman et al. 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

17 

1961; Brewer 1982; Dubery and Willats 1983; Figure 5). Block 
piles (Figure -le) have long been associated w ith  Raisz's talent 
for cartographic symbolization (1939,  19-!8). 

Co111pnriso11  Dntn: Disb11rse111e11ts n11d Pri11cipal Repnyments 
The possibilities for compa ring data with point symbols on 

bi\'CHiate maps are limitless. The focus  will  be on several 
combinations o f circles and squares, as well  as bars, e llipses, and 
cubes. The large number of arrange ment options available using 
common grad uated circles and squ ares (side by sid e or 
m·crla yed) offer different visual impressions  w hi le  ill ustrating 
the same data (Figure 6a, b, d, a nd f).  Overlapping  the symbols 
produces a more integral symbol that involves pattern recogni 
tion because differences in relative values produce different 
overall  symbol forms (compa re the mostly black symbol for 
Colombia, which is the only country for which payments exceed 
disbursements, to the others). Combining shapes for two 
qualitati\'cly different va riables, such as graduated circles and 
squares (Figure 6f),  increases the variation in overall symbol 
form<,  but makes relative sizes difficult to compare. 

There are many options beyond combinations of circles and 

squares for comparing data. Adjacent semicircles (Figure 6c) 
clearly illustrate differences between the  two data sets. How 
C\'er,  the ad jacent stra ight edges may lead to linear rather than 
are,1-based estimates of val ue differences.  Estimates of differ 
ences between pairs of linear symbols arc easier to make, 
although graduated  bars (Figure 6e) can be more 'curnbcrsome' 
because linear ~ca ling increases the range of the map covered by 
symbols (squa re-root scaling for areal symbols and cube-root 
scaling for volumetric symbols produce more compact ~hapes). 
One student (Jeff Erickson) offered a creative combination for 
pairing g raduated cubes (Figure 7a). Cubes may also be placed 
'>ide by side or stacked. An exa mple of using pictograms to 
illustrate comparison data can be found in Thomas's Tl1ird  \Vorld 
Alla~ ( 199-l).  He used a split textbook to illustrate "Gross 
primary school enrollment ratio" (p. 59) bet\\'een males and 
fema les. The left side of the book was linearly scalt.?d  to the 
percentage of male enrollment; the right side to female enroll 
ment. 

El lipses (Figure 6g) may be constructed w ith their axes sca led 

to illustrate different sets of data, in this case disbursement on 
the horizon tal axis and principal repi1yments on the vertica l. 
:V1,KEi1chren  (1993,  p. 90) describes this combination as an 
integ ration of attributes merged into one symbol.  He cites 
Garner (1976) when stating "that object integration is more 
likely to lead to integral or configural conjunction than will two 
distinct '>patially contiguous objects (e.g., pc1ired  bars on a bar 
chart)" (p. 90). The axes of these ellipses were SCi1lcd  using the 
linear dimcn~ions of the bars in Figure 6e. When ellipses are 
highly elongated in one direction or the other, the reader will 
rccogni/e '>patial  patterns in \·ariablc differences by the orienta 
tion of the symbols' major axes.  Ellipses with more circu lar 
~hapes repre~ent comparisons for which neither of the mi1pped 
values arc significantly larger than the other. Ra!:>e  (1987) 
included bi\·ariate e llipses in his point-symbol mapping soft 
ware. 

Orthographic 

D 1cm 
1 cm 

Oblique examples 

cavalier 

1 4/11 
LlJ. usual 

cabinet 

·H=71 
LJ)45  usual 

Axonometric examples 

shape and area of orthographic view maintained 
(angles sum to 90  ) 

70 

Elaborations 

di metric: 
two scales same 

tnmetnc: 
three scales ditterent 

Elaborations 

two-point perspective: 
two  vanishing points 

three-point perspective: 
three  vanishing points 

Isometric 

all scales same 

Perspective 
one-point 
perspective 

A 
LJ 

£1~111,· .i.  A  ,,1mpling ot thl' m,rny \\'ay' o f 
dra'' mg thrl'e-d1111l'11,u111,1l  ,ymbol,, u'ing at 
ern cubl· to dem<•lht r.11,• tlw l'lfoct'> of variou' 
rrn1L'<l1Pn  ,,.,ll'm' (Duben· ,md \\ 11lat' 1981). 
Tlw cubl· pn•1edi<•11' ~L·1wr,1ll\' 111crea'l' in 
snplw.;tic,1l1<lll trom thl' l<'P do\\'n in  thi-. figure'. 

18 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

- - - - - - - -

a. Adjacent 

Graduated 
Squares 

D sbursements  Payments 

Pnncpal 

111100 

11 500 

c.  Adjacent 

Graduated 
Semicircles 

soot t 500 

5000 

e. Adjacent 

Graduated 
Bars 

-

0  s0ursemel'lts  Pr na pa 

Payments 

• 

500  5000 

100 

g. Ellipses with 
Graduated 
Axes 

Disbursements 
on  Horizontal Axis 

Principal 
Payments 
on 
Vertical 
Axis 

5000 

I 

i 

~ 

' 

/ 

"~ 
; 

("' 

' 

-. • 

b. Graduated 
Square 
Overlay 

Dlsbursemenls  Pavments 

P nncipal 

•  100. 

11 soo 

d. Graduated 

Circle Overlay 

PnncipaJ 
Payments 

• 

100 .  

9 soo 

5000 

f.  Graduated 

Circle/Square 
Overlay 

Pnnopa1 
0 sbursements  Payments 

• 

• 

100 

-e 500 II 

(• 

;; 

) 

,/;/'  (''"' 

,..../•/·-~ 
--.........., 

:t, 

(~ 

~ . 

.........,_ 
-

• 

' > 

' I 
"-.7 
( 

Figure 6.  Areal and linear bivariate point symbols for data compari 
son. Related variables, 1993 disbursements and p rincipal repayments, 
are compared on each map. :\ote that payments exceed disburse 
ments for Colombia. Thus, a representation of repayments as a 
proportion of disbursements (a circle segment fo r example) would be 
quite awkward  fro m both practical and logical perspectives. Example 
comparison symbols are: adjacent graduated squares (a), graduated 
square overlay (b ),  adjacent (areally scaled ) graduated semicircles (c), 
graduated circle overlay (d), adjacent graduated bars (e), graduated 
circle and square overlay (f), and ellipses with graduated axes (g). 
Ellipse axes in g are linearly sca led  to two data values to produce 
both varied  shapes and sizes, though symbol areas are not directly 
scaled to a mapped  variable. The overa ll  look of the overlay symbols 
(b, d, and f) change markedly depending on w hich variable is the 
la rger of the two. Overlay symbol construction is awkward where 
amounts are near equal because symbols are almost the same size but 
the slightly smaller one will take visual precedence (note Guyana's 
gray symbol). 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

a.  Nested 
Cubes 

D soursements  Pl)lmtn!$ 

Pr·nc1pa 

/'I::-

I 

I 
( 
' '1 

19 

b. Graduated 
Segmented 
Cubes 

~ -

F1.x1m• 7  \ \,l umetnc bivariate point .,ymbols for bo th comparison ( il ) and proportional (b) rl'iallonships, The same dat,1 re presented  in  Figure'>  6 
and 8 are u.,ed for the cube~ in 7a and b rc~pcctively , 

Proportional Data: Public and Private Components of Disbursements 
Mapping proportional data differs substantially from  mapping com 
parison data because the smaller of the two data sets is always part of the 
larger set, unlike the disbursement and repayment data used in the 
comparison examples (Figure 6 and 7a). In Figures 7b and Sa, c, e, and g, 
graduated symbols are scaled to represent total disbursements and are 
segmented by the proportions of loans to public and private entities. 
Symbols of constant size in Figures Sb, d, and fare segmented to represent 
only the proportions of the disbursements'  compositions, not the total 
disbursement value (as the graduated symbols do) so  they are akin to 
univariate symbols. In all cases, the black portions of each symbol repre 
sent disbursements to public entities and the gray portions to private. For 
example, the use of graduated segmented circles (Figure Se) allows the 
map reader to compare the total  va lue of disbursements among countries 
as well as the proportions o f private and public disbursements. In contrast, 
maintaining a constant symbol size (Figure Sf) focuses the reader's atten 
tion on the proportional relationship. 

Examples of sectored circles and wedges (Fig Se, f.  and g) are found in a 

variety of sources including Historical Atlas of Cminda, Vol.  Jll (Kerr and 
Holdsworth 1990), The l\/atio11nl Atlas of Sweden: The  E1ri.'iro11111e11t (Bernes 
and Grundsten 1992), and Tire MnritilJle Provinces  Atlas (McCalla 19SS). The 
Historicnl Atlas of Canada  makes extensive use of sectored circles, and often 
uses the space surrounding the map to allow extreme symbol sizing. 
Wedges, often used in The  National Atlas of  Sweden, are particularly well 
suited for  illustrating quantitative data associated with points like ports or 
cities (p. 97 for example). Wedges can easily be rotated to fit  in where 
other 'bulky' symbols can not easily be associated with a point location. 
The graduated wedge radi us represents the total symbol size without 
showing the entire circle from which the segment came (Figure Sg). The 
wedge's point anchors it to its enumeration unit (the opposite association 
is  used for graduated spikes; Figure 3b). The MnritilJle  Prot>i11ces  Atlas uses a 
grouping of four wedges set at ninety degrees, like four flower petals. Each 
wedge represents the amount of a particular type of overnight accommo 
dation across the region. The reader may either compare entire symbol 
structures or individual segments of each symbol. 

The segmented bars and squares were constructed with fifty-percent 
markers (Figure Sa, b, c, and d). Students often includ ed  these reference 

"In  contrast,  maintaining a 
constant symbol size (Figure Bf) 
focuses  the reader's attention 011 
the proportio11al relationship." 

10 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

"while their popularity and 
psychological nppeal are 
grudgingly ndmitted their use is 
'rm  insult to mnn 's 
intelligence'" 

representation of comparison and proportional relationships within 
multivariate graduated symbols. 

In 1926, Eells examined "The Relative Merits of Circles and Bars for 
Representing Component Parts." He noted commonly held criticisms of 
using circles to illustrate component parts (what we refer to as propor 
tional relationships) including: difficulty in rapid and accurate estimation 
of values, inaccuracy of estimation due to their areal nature, and the 
suggestion that "while their popularity and psychological appeal are 
grudgingly admitted their use is 'an insult to man's intelligence'" (p. 122). 
However, Eells' study concluded that circle diagrams divided into compo 
nent parts were easily and accurately read, that accuracy increased with 
the number of subdivisions of circles but decreased for subdivided bars, 
and that the use of circle diagrams was "worthy of encouragement" (p. 
132). Croxton and Stryker's 1927 follow-up study supported Eells's 
findings and suggested that for illustrating 25, 50,  and 75 percent relation 
ships, circles worked significantly better than bars. Croxton and Stein 
(1932) further examined the accuracy of size estimates using bars, squares, 
circles, and cubes. They concluded that scaled bars yielded more accurate 
results compared to area or volume symbols. Furthermore, they found 
that performance with both circles and squares was better than with cubes. 
Their study supported the commonly held belief that the fewer dimen 
sions a graduated symbol possesses, the more accurately its size is esti 
mated (a general rule strongly supported by Cleveland, 1985, p. 254). 
Neither Croxton's studies nor Eells' study was performed in a carto 
graphic context. Their results offered basic comparisons of graduated 
symbols without the complications of spatially registered data. 

Clarke (1959) examined the relative accuracy of size estimation for  lines, 

circles, squares, spheres, and cubes. His data ~ere collected using three 
symbol sizes in each trial. Subjects were asked to estimate the sizes of the 
small and large symbols using a middle-size symbol. Greater errors in 
estimations of size occurred as the number of dimensions increased and as 
the difference between the symbol and the standard increased. Ekman and 
Junge (1961) elaborated on this conclusion by generating power functions 
for symbol types. 

Flannery (1971) included examination of the relative effectiveness of 

wedges and bars compared to circles in his research. Although he con 
cluded that wedges were not estimated as accurately as circles, he noted 
their usefulness for showing proportions for specific locations (cities, 
ports, and intersections, for example) because the vertex naturally points 
to the place to which the value belongs. He also noted the relatively high 
accuracy of estimations with linearly scaled bars. 

Crawford (1973) examined perceptions of graduated squares. Specifi 
cally, he studied the potential for  linear rather than areal estimation of 
square size and whether squares were correctly, under-, or over-estimated. 
His regression model clearly indicated that square sizes were estimated 
a really, not linearly, and he showed that square sizes were more accu rately 
estimated than circles. Likewise, Heino (1991) recommended the use of 
squares and cubes, instead of circles and spheres, for accurate estimation 
of data sets with large ranges. 

In  addition to comparing types of symbols, multivariate symbols would 
seem a logical topic of research in thematic cartography. Both MacEachren 
(1995) and Nelson and Gilmartin (1996), however, note that very little of 
this research has been done. One theme in their reviews of the topic is the 
link between the design of multivariate symbols and whether symbol 
dimensions representing each variable remain separable or are combined in 
a more holistic symbol with i11tegrnl dimensions (Shortridge 1982). Nelson 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

11 

and Gilmartin examine symbols representing sets o f four variables with 
attention to the multiple purposes of mul tivariate map symbols: fro m 
' wha t' and ' how much'  at the local level (w hich  may be be tter  represen ted 
wi th  se parable dimensions ) to regional patte rns a nd  corre la tions betwee n 
variables (which  may be bette r re presented with integral dimensions). 
As an example o f multivaria te symbo l resea rch, Slocum (1981) exam 
ined two-sectored  pie graphs. Specifically, he measured  the just-noticeable 
difference fo r sector size and accuracy of sector size estimation. He found 
that subjects could no t d iscriminate between sector size diffe rences of less 
than  nine degrees, and that sector sizes were estimated  w ithin a three 
percent margin of error. He s uggested  round ing data to the nearest five 
percent,  ra ther than one percent, before drawing secto rs . His study was, in 
part, a response to Balogun (1978), w ho suggested  the  use o f d ecagraphs 
(ten-sid ed  polygons) for  re presenting p roportions.  Exam p les of decag raph 
use can be fo und in the A tlas c~f Ncufo1111dla11d a11d La/1rador, ·w he re they a re 
used  to represen t economic d ata (McManus et al. 1991, pla tes 10 and 19). 

Poin t Sy mbol Discussion in Cartographic Textbooks 

Cnrtosrnphy: Tlre111atic Map  Design by Dent (1996) and Elements of Cartog 

ra phy by Robinson e t al.  (1995) a re  two widely used  collegiate  texts. 
Chapter 8 of Dent's book o ffers a concise su rvey of the resea rch tha t has 
been conducted over the past twenty-fi,·e years,  includi ng apparent 
.scaling (Flannery 1971 ), effects of symbol clustering on size pe rcep tion 
(Gilma rtin  L98l b), anchor effects (Cox 1976),  range gra ding (Meihoefe r 
1969),  and open and cut-out circles (Groop  and Cole  J978). Dent also 
directs atte nti on to multiva riate g radu a ted  point symbols,  the use of 
graduated ~qu a res and  triang les, and the use of volume tric symbols . 
Rob inson et al. briefl y d iscuss the use of varia tions in symbol sha pe and 
orientation to rep resent classes of grad ed  d a ta. They o ffer an in-depth 
d iscussion of grad u ated circle use in representing univariate da ta with the 
addition of a color sequence fo r a second map va riable. Their coverage o f 
multivaria te mapping is d ivid ed  into four types,  in  their words:  supe rim 
position o f features (different symbols), segmented  symbols (sectored  pie 
graphs),  cross-vari able mapping (bi va riate choropleth ),  and composite 
indexes (cartographic mod eling). They wa rn students tha t "supe rmaps" 
illustrating too many va riables o ften hinder the clear communication 
intended  by the mapm a ker. 

Issues fo r Fu ture Research 

Point symbol ma ps ma y be d esig ned  with multiple objectives, such  as 

en courging accurate symbo l-size estimation, easing legend matching, 
attracting a ttention, representing  patterns across a  map, and sh owing 
spatial re lationships be tween ,·ariables. Success fo r one d esign objective 
often necessitates fa ilure fo r compe ting objectives (Petch enik 1983), 
though interacti,·e environme nts that encourage multiple representations 
improve on this d iscouraging reality.  Furthe r expe rime ntal testing a nd 
othe r inves tiga tions should be structured  to account for the multiple tasks 
for which  maps are designed. 

Exa mples of competing objecti ves can be found  for varied  aspects of 
point symbol mapping,  such as range grading, symbol dimensionality, 
map comparison, and multiva riate symbols . The lite ra ture revea ls a 
tension between accu rate esti ma tion of indi\'idual svmbols and the 
alternati\·e of range-graded  symbols,  for which da ta  values are classed and 
assigned  to orde red but arbitraril y sca led symbol sizes. Range-graded 
symbols are selected  to be ob viously d iffe rent in size and easily identified 
in a legend. A hybrid  approach w ith symbols scaled  to means of data 

"Further experimental testing 
and other i11 vestigatio11s s'1011ld 
be structu red to account fo r the 
multiple tasks fo r which maps 
are designed. " 

12 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

"A hybrid approach  with 
symbols scaled  to  means of data 
classes, for example, 111ay be a 
useful compromise ... " 

GRADUATED POINT SYMBOL 
EXAMPLES AND SOURCES OF 
INI\'OV A TION 

classes, for example, may be a useful compromise between the comfort of 
easy identification and an accurate overview of relative magnitudes across 
a map. Similarly, low symbol dimensionality improves symbol-size 
estimation but may hinder map pattern interpretation. The larger range in 
sizes of linearly-scaled symbols (bars, for example) causes symbols to 
extend farther across the map than higher-dimension and more compact 
symbol forms (areal and volumetric symbols such as squares or cubes) 
representing the same data. Adjustments within a map series, such as 
equalizing symbol areas among maps before comparison (Peterson 1985) 
or using constant symbol sizes for minimum and maximum data va lues 
(Monmonier 1977), assist pattern comparison but interfere with compari 
son of data magnitudes between maps. Another challenge is choice of 
multivariate mappings with separable symbol dimensions (which may 
encourage comparisons within symbols and w ithin variables) versus 
integral dimensions (which may improve understanding of patterns in 
correlations between variables). Although researching the endless variety 
of multivariate point symbols is a daunting prospect, it would be useful to 
see work on how people use and understand these types of representa 
tions. 

The next sections summarize many possibilities for point symbol 

mapping. In addition to the theoretical research issues that are reviewed, 
interest in these symbols also invites practical  research on how point 
symbols can be effectively implemented in mapping, GIS,  and visua liza 
tion software environments. 

Figures 2 through 8 illustrate both common and innovati ve ways to 
illustrate quantitative univariate and bivariate data with graduated point 
symbols, and Figure lb presents a choropleth version of the map for 
comparison. In addition to univariate representations, this discussion 
concentrates on basic ways of representing proportional and comparison 
relationships on bivariate maps. These terms require some explanation. 
' Proportional'  data refers to relationships in which one data set is part of 
the other data set being mapped. Similarly, Eells (1926) referred to repre 
senting proportional relationships as illustrating component parts. 'Com 
parison' data refers to those data that are two separate measures but the 
relationship between them (correlation) is of interest. One data set is not a 
part of the other. The data on loan disbursements that was used for the 
maps in this paper, for example, may be divided into public and private 
proportions or it may be co111pared to principal repayments for the same 
year. 

Our mapped data (Table 1) were taken from a World Bank report 

(1994). The same data are mapped in each of the figures to aid comparison 
of the symbol types, though the small extent of the maps does not foster 
regional comparisons and does not allow evaluation of the symbols with 
more numerous enumeration units. All  data are for countries in northern 
South America. Point symbols are used for country data in these maps to 
emphasize that point symbols are appropriate for areal data, even though 
some authors restrict their representations to choropleth mapping (Figure 
1 b ).  All data are for 1993 debt levels: total loan disbursements, principal 
repayments, and the proportions of total disbursements for public versus 
private loans. Table 1 notes provide further explanation of the variables. 

Univariate Data: Tota l 1993 Disbursements 

Figures 1 through 4 illustrate a variety of methods for mapping 
univariate data. Figure la lists disbursement values as an area l table. 
Figure lb is a choropleth map of these data, which is shown for compari-

13 

b.  Choropleth 

D  69 

• 662 
• 1551  - 2137 
• 12195 

c.Shaded 
Squares 

=:J  =1  69 

• 

• 

• 

• 

662 

1551-2137 

12195 

• 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

VENEZUELA 
2137 

GUYANA 
69 

COLOMBI A 
1697 

ECUAD OR 
662 

PERU 
1 551 

I 
~ 

BRAZIL 
12195 

a.  Areal Table 

1993 
Disbursements 

Disbursements 
mapped are  the 
amount of each 
country's 1993 debt 
flow that is drawn on 
loan commitments. 
Reported in millions 
of U.S.  dollars 

Source : 
World Bank 1994 

Fi:;:11n• 1.  A re,1 l t,1blc (a), d1ornplcth (b), ,111d  ~haded ~quarc (c) 
representation-;  of 111,111  d i'iburscment dat,1. The• many point symbol'> 
dc'icribcd in th1s paper arc allcrnati \ c~ t<1  the flawed  reprcscnt,1tion-. 
in a and b. N umber.., (,1) d 11  not provide ,1  vi'>ual rL'prL' ... entation of 
re la ti\ e  mag n1tudt'' 11t data\ alues. Thl' ..,1/e' o t the gray fil], o f thl' 
choropleth m.1p (b) ilrl' con trolled b y  the si/C'i nf the· cnuntril''> ratl1L'r 
th,111  the data\ a lu.~'·  Cnuntr~ siLl'  ha!->  a  large  vis ual impact nn tlw 
da ta  rcprc'"·'ntal1on but it i' not d ircctlv  rela ted to the ecom>mlC 
\'ariab lc ot 111terc•-.t.  h1r this  rca5on, Cil1:tng r.1phc•r-. gl'nerally 
admoni!->h  ,1g.1in<.1  rq>rc,enting total value~ with a choroplcth  m ap. 
Shaded point svmbob o l a ~onstnn t  , i/L', such a'> squa res (c),  arl' one 
way of rcnw\ ing the effect 11f enumer,1tion-un1I -;i/l' 1111  a grn,v-~ca l c 
-.\'mb11li/ation 

• 
• • 

Countrv 

Loan 
Disbu rsements·• 

Principal 
Repayments" 

Disbursements 
to Public Entities' 

Brazil 
Colombia 
Ecuador 
Guvana 
Peru 
Venezuela 

12195 
1697 
66:2 
69 
1551 
2137 

6212 
2083 
488 
46 
1007 
1515 

3265 
15-t? 
.+97 
69 
1.+92 
1877 

\.oh_.., 
All d,11,1  .ire• t11r  199:> ,111d  arc•  rq>ortcd  111  milho1v ..  ol L.S. d1,ll.ir,. Till' d,1t,1  source io;  a  199-1 
\\nrld  B.111l-.  pubh.:at1on titk'd l\'<11/d  De/it  T,1/·lc-.  I \l.'111t1l  £1111111\1'  1,:r  Oci'l'/1•1'111:\ 
c { litJI!r:r·.:. . \  ,1/rrn:t"  ~ 

L11,111  di,bur,c•nw n h  ML· dl'tined ,,, .. dr.i\\ 111g' tln lnan commilml'nh during till' \'ear 
'pec1hl'd ..  (p.  r«).  h ~un·' I t hr11ugh -I ,]io\\' uni\',1 ri,1te m.1ps 1>1  di,bur~l' n h.'nt~. 

l'rincip,1!  rep.n men I' .ire• .. the amoun ts 1>t  princi pal (amo rti/ation) p aid in foreign cu rrenc\'. 
good,, or 'L'n ILL''  111  tllL' yc'M 'PL'Cihl'd ..  (p.  \i' ).  f'rincip.11  rc•p,11·ml'llh are compared 111 
loan d1sbur,c•mc•nh 111  Figure' 6 ,111d  7,i. 

Di,bur,L'lll<.'lll' to public l'nllt1e' .ire• e'tc•rn,111>bh~,1t1111b o t public 1lc>btm,, .. including the• 
nal11lll,1I  ~11\ L'rn111e11t.  .i political subd1\'i.;1nn (or an agl'nC\'  Pt c•ithc•r). ,1nJ ,1uton1llllll\h 
public bPd11<' (p  1  ').The rc•nia1111kr o t lo.in' Ml' lo pri\ ale debtor' \\'ho .ire not 
gu.ir.1nll'L'<f b\  p ul,h, l'lllil1c,. l'ul'llC ,111d  pri\ ate• di,bur'L'lllt'lll' arc•  till' pn1portio11-. o t 
tot.ii d1,bur,l'mc•111, m.1pped in  F1~ u re, 7h .111d /;. 

14 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

)  .;'._, 
.:1 
\) 

-:] 
2 .1  ?'-\ 

·  ~~---.. 
' 

' 

~ .01 
· 

• 
-

a.  Graduated 
Numbers 

Disbursements 
in  Billions of 
U.S. Dollars 

1.7 

/ 

/ 
- 0~ 

.1 

E 

'' 1.6 112.2 5.0 

c. Graduated 
Squares 

100 • 500 
II 

5000 

e.  Grid Squares 

• 

100 

~  500 

' ( 
\ 

II 

I 

( 

•,, 

/ 

b.  Graduated 
Circles 

100 • 500 e 

5000 

d. Graduated 
Ellipses 

100 • 

500 • 

f.  Graduated 
Pictograms 

100 

500 

I 

/ 

( 

! 

. 
' 

I 

5000 

F1s11 rc 2. Are al univa riate poin t sy mbols representing 1993 loan disbursement d a ta: g raduated  numbers (a), graduated circles (b), graduated 
squares (c), gradua ted ellipses (d), grid squares (e),  and graduated pictograms (f). Data values are in millions of U.S.  dollars, except for Figure 
2a which shows billions of U.S. d ollars (see Table 1 for description of mapped data). Symbols arc sized  to data values u sing square-root 

son but is not a recommended representation for these total dollar values. 
Figure 1c is a variation on the gray-scale representation of the choropleth 
map, with the gray fills applied to a repeated square symbol of constant 
size. This variation removes the unwanted effects of variation in enumera 
tion-unit size, though differences in lightness are more difficult to compare 
than differences in symbol area (Cleveland 1985, p.  254). Pazner (1997) 
proposed a similar representation with constant-size squares that he 
termed "tile maps." Size and lightness may also be used as redundant 
symbolizations (each representing the same data values w ithin symbols), 
and lightness may be used to map a second variable within a graduated 

20 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

I 

I 

a.  Graduated 
Segmented 
Bars 

~  %  Private 

%  Public 

• 

100 

500  5000 

·-

_ , -

c.  Graduated 
Segmented 
Squares 

100 • 
II 

500 

e.  Graduated 
Segmented 
Circles 

• 

100 

500 

% Private  % Public 

' 

g.  Graduated 
Wedges 

Percent Private 

' 4 • 25 

f 

"· 

-,, ·.-/  / 
.. / - -

- -

' :-• 
'  ' I 

·, 

,,-

I 

./?S· 
·.. 
/  /) 

~___...,__~ 

~ 

~  I'  ~ 

'""' 
~ 

) .. 
,:  ... / .. ( 

) 
~..  I 

b.  Segmented 

Bars 

Percent 
of 1993 Loan 
Disbursements 
to Private 
Debtors 

Percent of 
1993 Loan 
Disburse 
ments to 
Public 
Entities 

d. Segmented 
Squares 

Percent 
Private 

50% 

Percent 
Public 

f.  Segmented 
Circles 

Percent 
Private 

Percent 
Public 

Figure 8.  Linear and areal bivariate point symbols for a proportional 
data relationship: public and private disbursements are proportions 
of total 1993 disbursements. Example proportion representations are: 
graduated segmented bars (a), segmented bars of constant size (b), 
graduated segmented squares {c), segmented squares (d), graduated 
segmented circles (c), segmented circles (f), and graduated wedges 
(g). Figures b, d, and f ~how only the proportions of private and 
public di sbur~ement~ and not the total amounts of disbursements, 
which are shown in a, c, and e.  Figure g shows only the portion of 
private disbursements as circle sectors, or wedges, with an indicati on 
of the total-disbursement graduated circles in the square-root scaled 
sector rad ii . 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

21 

points in  their symbol designs, which assists accu rate percentage esti 
mates. The symbol form in Figure 8b is known to statisticians as a framed 
rectangle (Cleveland 1985, p. 208; Dunn 1987, 1988), and Monmonier 
(1993, p. 65) describes its usefulness in representing both absolute magni 
tudes and intensities. Dunn (1987) also suggests scaling the widths of the 
rectangles to total data values (to total disbursements for  Figure 8b). In a 
conversation about Figure 8,  MacEachren mentioned a successful student 
project from an ACSM design competition th at divided graduated squares 
into ten-by-ten grids such that each cell represented one percent, and each 
row ten percent, of the whole for all  symbol sizes (rather than using grid 
cells of a fixed size; a hybrid of Figure 8c and 2e). 

The work of students new to cartography has been an inspiration. With 
modern computing at their disposal and freedom from  the conventions of 
traditional thematic mapping, students are producing a wide variety of 
creative symbols for mapping data usually symboli zed by graduated 
circles or squares. For example, a recent student assignment with eco 
nomic data produced creative ideas ranging from a propo rtionall y scaled 
\ilonopoly game character (with pockets turned out or clutching money 
bags) to weight scales drawn tipped to illustrate balances between dollar 
amounts (by Elliott Westerman and Erika Bozza respectively).  Are these 
effective symbols? Wi th so little resea rch into multivariate representations, 
one can not say, but this type of experime ntation can be encouraged until 
there is e\·idence to the contrarv. 

The intent of this paper has been to review some of the major topics on 
w hi ch grad uated symbol research has been conducted and to demonstrate 
the wide variety of ways to map univariate data as well as biva riate 
comparison and proportional relationships. The survey \·vas not exhaus 
tive, but if it h as inspired recall of other symbol forms that have been 
missed, then it has been successful  in provoki ng consideration o f the wide 
range of possibilities available •vith point symbo ls.  Modern computer 
mapping allows mapmakers greater flexibility in desig ning creative 
graduated point symbols. This increase in fl exibility increases the impor 
tance of research examining symbol design issues. As this article has 
illus tra ted, there are wide-ranging possibilities for applying creative, eye 
ca tching symbol designs to summarize and synthesize quantitative spatial 
dis tributions. 

Comments on the manuscript by Judy Olson and by an anony mous 
reviewer are acknowledged with appreciation. This research was funded 
by a George H. Deike Jr. Research Grant from  the College of Earth and 
Mineral Sciences at Penn State. 

CONCLUSION 

" ... there are wide-ranging 
possibilities for applyi11g 
creative, eye-catching symbol 
designs  to summarize mid 
synthesize quantitative spatial 
distributions." 

ACKl\'OWLEDGMEl\'TS 

Abler, R.F.  1987. The >Jational Science Foundation National Center for 
Geographic Information and Analysis. 1Htcmatio11a/ /011mal of Geograpl1ical 
/11for111atiou  Syste111s 1(4):303-326. 

REFEREl\'CES 

Balogun, 0.\/. 1978. The decagraph: A substitute for the pie graph? T/ie 
Cartograplric journal 15:48-85. 

Bernes, C., and C. Grundsten (eds.). 1992. Tire Natio11a/ A tins uf Swede11: The 
E1wiro11111e11t,  vol. 4. Stockholm: SNA. 

22 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

Brewer, C. 1982. The Effectiveness of the Cube as a Map Symbol.  Unpublished 
Undergraduate Thesis, Department of Geography, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, Ontario. 

Chang, K.T.  1977. Visual estimation of graduated circles. The Canadian 
Cartographer 14(2):130-138. 

Chang, K.T. 1980. Circle size judgment and map design. The American 
Cartographer 7(2):155-162. 

Clarke, J.I. 1959. Statistical map reading. Geography 44:96-104. 

Cleveland, W.S.  1985. The Elements of Graphing Data.  Monterey, CA: 
Wadsworth. 

Cox, C.W. 1976. Anchor effects and the estimation of graduated circles and 
squares. The American Cartographer 3(1 ):65-74. 

Crawford, P. V.  1971. Perception of grey-tone symbols. Annals of the 
Association of American Geographers 3(1 ):721-735. 

Crawford, P.V . 1973. The perception of graduated squares as cartographic 
symbols.  The Cartographic foumal 10(2):85-88. 

Croxton, F.E., and R.E. Stryker. 1927. Bar charts versus circle diagrams. 
Journal of the American Statistical Association 22:473-482. 

Croxton, F.E., and H . Stein. 1932. Graphic comparisons by bars, squares, 
circles,  and cubes. Journal of the American Statistical Association 27:54-60. 

Dent, B.D. 1996. Cartography: Thematic Map Design, 4th ed. Dubuque, IA: 
Wm. C.  Brown. 

Dobson, M.W. 1974. Refining legend values for proportional circle maps. 
The Ca11adia11Cartographer 11(1):45-53. 

Dube ry, F., and]. Willa ts, 1983. Perspective mid Other Drawing Systems. 
New York:  Van Nostrand Reinhold. 

Dunn, R.  1987. Variable-width framed rectangle charts for statistical 
mapping. The A111ericm1  Statistician 41(2):153-156. 

Dunn, R.  1988. Framed  rectang le charts for statistical maps with shading: 
An experiment in graphical perceptio n. Tile American Statistician 42(2):123-
129. 

Eells, W.C. 1926. The  re lative merits of circles and bars for representing 
component parts. Journal of the American Statistical Association 21:119-132. 

Ekman, G., and K. Junge. 1961. Psychophysical relations in visual pe rcep 
tion of length, area, and volume. Scandinavian  journal of Psychology 2:1-10. 

Ekman, G., R.  Lindman, and W. William-Olsson. 1961. A psychophysical 
study of cartographic symbols. Perceptual and Motor Skills 13:355-368. 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

23 

Flannery, J.J.  1956. The Graduated Circle:  A Descriptio11, Analysis and Evalua 
tion of a Q11a11titativc Map  Symbol.  Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Depart 
ment of Geography, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI. 

Flannery, J.J.  1971. The relative effectiveness of some common graduated 
point symbols in  the presentation of quantitative data. Tire  Canadian 
Cartograplrer 8(2):96-109. 

Fraczek, I. 1984. Cartographic studies on graduated symbol map percep 
tion. llltematio11al Yearbook of Cartography 24:75-84. 

Garner, W.R. 1976. Interaction of stimulus dimensions in concept and 
choice processes. Cognitive Psychology 8:98-123. 

Gilmartin, P.P. 1981a. The interface of cognitive and psychophysical 
research in cartography. Cartographicn 18(3):9-20. 

Gilmartin, P.P. 1981b. Influences of map context on circle perception. 
Annals of tire Association of  A111erican Geographers 71(2):253-258. 

Griffin, T.L.C. 1985. Group and individual variations in judgment and 
their relevance to the scaling of graduated circles. Cartographicn 22(1):21-37. 

Griffin, T.L.C. 1990. The importance of visual contrast for graduated 
circles. Cartography 19(1 ):21-30. 

Groop, R.E.,  and D. Cole. 1978. Overlapping graduated circles/ Magnitude 
estirnabon and method of portrayal. The Canadian  Cartographer 15(2):114-
122. 

Heino, A.  1991. The estimation of graduated symbols in thematic maps. 
Fe1rnia  169(2):171-181. 

Kerr, D., and D.W. Holdsworth (eds). 1990. Historical Atlas of Canada,  Vol. 
III, Addressing the Twentieth  Century, 1891 -1961. Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press. 

Kidron, M.  and R. Segal. 1984. The  New  State of the World  Atlas.  New York: 
Simon & Schuster. 

Lindenberg, R.E.  1986. The Effect of Color 011  Q11a11titative Map Symbol 
Estimatio11 . Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Geography, 
University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS. 

MacEachren, A.M. 1995. How Maps Work:  Representation, Vis11a/izatio11, and 
Design.  New York: Guilford. 

Mackay, J.R. 1953. A new projection for cubic symbols on economic maps. 
Econo111ic Geograplry 29:60-62. 

Macmillan, N.A., CF. Moschetto, F.M.  Bialostozky, and L. Engel. 1974. Size 
judgment: The presence of a standard increases the exponent of the power 
law. Perceptio11 and Psychophysics,  16(2):340-346. 

Maddock, K.W., and B.  Crassini. 1980. Can estimation of circle size be 
influenced by instructions? Cartography 11(3):175-180. 

24 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

McCalla, R.J. 1988. Tl1e Maritime Provi11ces  Atlas. Halifax,  N.S.: Maritext. 

McManus, G.E., C.H. Wood, D.]. Mercer, and CM. Conway. 1991. Atlas of 
Neufo11ndla11d and Labrador. St. John's,  F: Breakwater. 

Meihoefer, H.J . 1969. The utility of the circle as a n effective cartographic 
symbol, The Cniwdia 11  Cartogrnphcr 6(2):105-117. 

Meihoefer, H.J.  1973. The visual perception of the circle in  thematic maps / 
Experimental results. The Ca11adia11Cartographer10(1):63-84. 

Mersey, J.E. 1996. Ca rtographic symbolization require ments for microcom 
puter-based geog raphic information systems. Ch. 13 in Cartographic 
Design: Tlreoreticnl ni1d Practical Perspectives, C.H. Wood and C.P. Keller 
(eds). New York: John Wiley & Sons. 157-175. 

Monmonie r, M.S. 1977.  Regression-based scaling to faci litate the cross 
correlation of graduated circle maps. The Cartograplric /01mwl 14(2):89-98. 

Monmonie r, M. 1993. Mapping lt Out. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 

Muehrcke,  P.C. 1996. The logic of map design. Ch. 19 in Cartographic 
Design: Tlieore ficnl and Practical Perspectives, C.H. Wood and C.P. Keller 
(eds). New York: John Wiley & Sons. 271-278. 

Nelson, E.S.,  and P. Gilmartin. 1996. An evaluation of multivariate, 
quantitative point symbols for  maps, Ch. 15 in Cartograpl1ic Design: Theo 
retical and Practical  Perspectives, C.H. Wood and C.P. Keller (eds). New 
York: John Wi ley & Sons. 191-210. 

Olson, J.M. 1975.  Experience and the improvement of cartogra phic com 
munication. The Cartograpliic founwl 12(2): 94-108. 

Olson, ].YI. 1978. Graduated  circles. Tire Cartographic /oumal 15(2): 105. 

Olson, J.M.  1979. Cognitive cartog ra phic experime ntation. Tile Ca11adia11 
Cartograpl1er 16(1 ):34-44. 

Patton, J.C., and T.A. Slocum. 1985. Spatial patte rn recall I An a nalysis of 
the aesthetic use of color. Cartographicn 22(3):70-87. 

Pazner, .\1.l. 1997. The tile  map: A table I map hybrid  re presentation in 
image form.  Proceedings, Inte rnational Symposium on Computer Mapping 
in Epidemiology and Environmental Health, February 1995 (published 
Apri l 1997),  pp. 105-11-l. 

Petchenik, B.B.  1983. A map maker's perspective on  map d esign research 
1950-1980. Ch . 3 in Graplric Co111m1111icntion a11d  Desig11  in Co11temporary 
Cartography, D.R.F. Taylor (ed.) ,  e'v  York: john Wiley & Sons. 37-68. 

Peterson, M.P. 1985.  Evaluating a map's image. Tire  American Cartographer 
12(1 ):41-55. 

Pete rson, M.P. 1987. The mental image in cartographic communication. 
The Cartograpliic f 0 11 mal 24(1 ):35-41. 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

25 

Raisz, E.  1939.  Block-pile system of statistical  maps.  Eco110111ic Geography 
15:185-1 88. 

Raisz, E.  19.f8. Gc11crnl Cartography,  New York:  McGraw Hill. 

Rase, W.D.  1987. The evolution of a g raduated symbol software  package 
in a changing graphicsenvironment. /nternationa/ fo11mal  ofGeogrnpl1icn/ 
lnfor111atio11Systems1(1):51-65. 

Robinson, A. H., J.L. Morrison, P.C. Muehrcke, A.J. Kimerling, a nd S.C. 
Guptill. 1995. Elr111c11ts of Cartogrnphy, 6th ed.  New York: John Wiley & 
Sons. 

Shortrid ge, B.G.  1982. Stimulus processing models from psychology: Can 
,.ve use them in cartography? The A111cricn11Cartographer9:155-167. 

Shortridge, B.G., and R.B.  Welch. 1980.  Are we asking  the right questions? 
Comment<; on instructions in cartographic psychophysical studies. The 
A111cricn11  Cartographer 7:19-23. 

Slocum, T.A. 1981.  Analyzing the communicative efficiency of two 
sectored pie graphs. Cartogrnpliicn 18(3):53-65. 

Slocum, T.A., and S.C. Yoder. 1996. Software for exploring te111pornl data 
associated <l'itl1  poi11t  locnlio11s.  Unpublished presentation at the annual 
meeting o f the North American Cartographic Informa tion Society in San 
Antonio. October. 

Teghtsoon ian, M.  1965. The judgment of size. T/1c A111cricn11  fo11ma/ of 
Psyclrology 78:392-402. 

Thomas,  A.  1994. Third \!Vorld Atlas, 211d ed. Washington D.C.: Taylor & 
Francis. 

Willi ams, R.L.  1956. Slatislicnl Sy111/70/s for Maps:  Their Design and Rclatin: 
Values.  r\e,..,· Haven, CT:  Map Laboratory, Ya le  University. Office of Naval 
Research Project \JR 088-006,  Non r 609(03). 

\A/ill iams, R.L.  1977. Graduated circles. T11c Cartogrnphic /011mal  14(2): 80. 

World Bank. 1994.  World  DlN Ta/1/es  1994-95,  Extemal Fi11a11cefor  Dl'l 1elop 
i11g  Co1111trics, <•of.  2.  Washington D.C.: The World Bank. 

Worth, C.  1989. Problems \·vi th ex pe rimental research in  map design- A 
case study. The Cartographic fo11rnal  26(2):148-153. 

26 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29,  Winter 1998 

Stephen Lavin 
Sonja  Rossum 
Shawn R.  Slade 
Department of Geography 
University of Nebraska 
Lincoln, NE 68588-0135 

Animation-Based Map Design: The 
Visual Effects of Interpolation on the 
Appearance of Three-Dimensional 
Surfaces 

Computer animation is a potential aid in map design, because it pro 
vides a means for quickly reviewing many design alternatives. This 
research is a conceptual exploration of one aspect of animation-based 
design: The effect of inverse-distance weighting on the visualization of 
three-dimensional maps. The primary variable examined is the 
inversedistance weighting exponent. Changing the exponent in small 
intervals allows the creation of a series of three-dimensional maps that 
can be assembled, and played back as a frame animation. In this proce 
dure, cartographers can view the visual effects of various exponents on 
the resulting surfaces. Design-based animations allow mapmakers to 
visualize effects of their decisions in advance of map production and to 
make more informed design decisions. It is suggested that this method 
can be expanded to examine map design for a great many forms of 
cartographic symbology. Ideally, automatic frame generation and a 
graphic user interface should become an integral part of the develop 
ment of these visualizations. 

KEYWORDS 

Animation, cartography, map, interpolation, inverse-distance weighting, 
map design, three-dimensional maps, visualization. 

INTRODUCTION 

T he mapping of continuous geographic phenomena in three dimensions 

presents a significant challenge to the design-oriented cartographer. 

The challenge is a consequence of the variety and interplay of design 
decisions which, in various combinations, can radically alter the appear 
ance of a map, and because of the greater than usual difficulty map-users 
have in interpreting three-dimensional maps (Rowles 1978, Jenks and 
Crawford 1971). Continuous spatial data is either measured or derived at 
control points, which, to a degree, are representative of the phenomena. In 
many cases, mathematical interpolation is then used to create a more 
extensive network of d ata values from  which a visual depiction can be 
subsequently generated. The look of the surface is heavily dependent on 
choices made during interpolation, and these choices are numerous, 
including grid size and shape, search methods, and interpolation equa 
tions (Golden Software 1990). Depending on the interpolation methods 
selected and the para meters used in the interpolation algorithm, the 
resulting maps may give very different impressions of a sing le geographic 
data set. 

Another set of design decisions are encountered following interpola 

tion. These are decisions involving the visual orientation of the three 
dimensional surface.  These decisions deal more directly w ith visual map 
attributes, and for that reason, are more predictable in their visual mani 
festations than those involving interpolation. Figure 1 shows a variety of 
options including surface rotation, angle of view from the horizon, and 
vertical exaggeration, as well  as a number of other controls that affect the 
eventual look of the surface.  Although these choices can also profoundly 
influence map appearance, their effects are somewhat easier to anticipate 
than those involving the mathematical equations of interpolation. For 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

27 

2ao0 

Vertical Angle.  An angle of 90 degrees 
places the viewer directly above the surface 

Vertical  Exaggeration.  A value of  zero would 
show a totally flat surface. 

Horizontal Rotation.  A rotation angle of 360 
degreesplaces the viewer due east of the surface. 

F1~1111'  I.  Ori<'llf11/io11  rnrin/>les  i11  tlnl'c-dm11·11~i<m nl  mnpp111s 

example, it is easier to envision what \·viii happen to a surface if the angle 
of \'iew above the horizon is changed from 30 to  50 degrees than it is to 
predict the ,·isual effects of changing the inverse-distance weighting 
exponent from one to three. Consequently, this research is concerned w ith 
the more difficult case of visualizing the effects of interpolation decisions. 
While it is true that contemporary three-dimensional surface-producing 
software allows experimentation with the effects of design choices on map 
appearance, this is usually accomplished one map at a  time and normally 
requires many iterations before a satisfactory map is created. For example, 
SURFER (Golden Software 1990), a popular isoline and three-dimensional 
mapping program for Windows / DOS-based computers, permits the 
creation of one surface at a  time, and does not give the user the capability 
to view a number of different surfaces in rapid succession. It is difficult 
and time consuming to compare the visual results of design alternatives, 
and this hampers the cartographer's abi lity to identify the most appropri 
ate selections for representing data and communicating accurate and 
useful visualizations of geographic data. 

Animations are potentially ,·aluable aids in selecting optimum ways of 
designing three-dimensional maps, representing data, and gaining a more 
complete understanding of geographic data through exploration o f 
varying interpolation options. Furthermore, many other types of carto 
graphic symbols can be explored using similar methods. Although our 

"A11i111atio11s  are potentially 
valuable aids in selecting opti 
mum wnys of designing three 
di111e11sio11al  maps,  representing 
data, a11d gni11i11g a more com 
plete 1111dersta11ding of geo 
graph ic data  through explora 
tion of rnrying interpolation 
options." 

28 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

"Clearly, ani111atio11  e11ables 
mapmakers a11d map-users alike, 
to perceive differe11ces which 
may otherwise go undetected 
whe11  viewi11g a series of static 
maps, perhaps even the same 
111aps  that compose the 
animation." 

"Ani111atio11  adds a dimension 
to map interpretation and 
analysis that the viewing of 
individual static maps can  not 
provide, jus t as  the experie11ce of 
viewing a motion pictures is 
quite different fro111  looki11g at a 
sequence of i11dividual stills 
from  the same fi/111." 

focus is just one aspect of three-dimensiona l mapping, it is not unreason 
able to assume that animation can be used to explore variations in unit 
va lue in dot mapping, or the visual effect of varying isoline intervals, for 
example. 

Visualization 

Geographic visualization is an act of cognition through which mental 

images of geographic data which have no visual fo rm are developed 
(Peterson 1995, MacEachren 1995). This notion of visualization can be 
extended to the realm of computer cartography in which data stored in 
computer memory can be d isplayed visually. Cartographic visualization 
of geographic data can facilitate examination and explanation of processes 
which evolve over time, over space, or a combination of both (Campbell 
and Egbert 1990).  It is also a concept which focuses on the exploration of 
data rather than data presentation. As such, cartographic visualizations 
created with exploratory data analysis in mind are generated as animation 
sequences used to identify trends and relationships in the data. This 
identification which may or may not be observed in a non-visual setting, 
prompts new understanding of research problems or real world applica 
tions (MacEachren and Ganter 1990). 

In our stud y map animation is used to construct a sequence of maps 
created by incrementing the weighting exponent in the inverse-distance 
equation. Visual differences between adjacen t maps in the sequence may 
at first seem negligible,  but exa mination of a lengthy an imation sequence 
reveals pronounced variations as the weighting exponent increases. 
Clearly, animation enables mapmakers and map-users alike, to perceive 
differences which may otherwise go undetected when viewing a series of 
static maps, perhaps even the same maps that compose the animation. 
Anima tion adds a d imension to  map interpretation and ana lysis that the 
viewing of individual static maps can not provide, just as the experience of 
viewing a motion pictures is quite different from looking at a sequence of 
individual stills from the same film. 

This study is restricted to developing a case study whereby a sequence 

of three-dimensional surfaces is produced in w hich visual differences 
betvveen surfaces are a result of small variations in  the weighting value 
used in  the inverse-distance weighting interpolation algorithm. Addition 
ally,  the method of control point search in interpolation was varied in one 
instance in order to provide a slightly different perspective to animation 
based design in three-dimensional mapping. The sequence of changes in 
surface smoothness revealed by the animation allows map-designers to 
visualize and compare the effects of changing variables in  the creation of 
three-dimensional surfaces. 

Continuous Surface Interpolation 

Interpolation of continuous geographic data for the purpose of three 
dimensional mapping provides estimates of data values for  geographic 
attributes, such as precipitation and temperature, at unsampled grid 
points within the area of existing control points. The rationale behind all 
interpolation is that points close together in  space are more likely to have 
simil ar values than points further apart (Monmonier 1982). Rather than 
drawing boundaries and generalizing the area around known control 
points as homogeneous,  interpolation is used to model the expected 
variation of values within an area (Burrough 1986). Interpolated va lues are 
then used to generate a visual surface representative of the continuous 
nature of the phenomena being mapped. 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

29 

The challenge of interpolation is to choose a technique which creates a 
plausible model of the variation between control points. Selection of the 
most ap propriate method depends on the type of data used, the amount of 
computational time available, and the degree of accuracy required  (Lam 
1983), although this last factor is difficult to anticipate in advance. A wide 
variety of algorithms have been developed for point interpolation. For 
exa mple, surfaces constructed by kriging, minimum curvature, and 
inve rse-distance weighting interpo lations are shown in  Figure 2.  As can 
be seen, variations in interpolation method can produce pronounced 
visual differences. Kriging is a regional variable  theory technique that 
assumes an underlying linear va riogram, and because of this it can pro 
duce an estimate of error associated with an interpo lation (Burrough 1986, 
Sampson 1975). Minimum curvature keeps the g rid surface fixed  at known 
control points while iteratively applying an algorithm to smooth the g rid 
ded surface. Its primary benefit is that the resulting surface  is constrained 
to  pass through all con trol points (Golde n Software 1990).  Other interpola 
tion methods include splines, polynomials, Fourier Series, Power Series 
Trend, and distance-weighted least-squares (Lam 1983).  Each technique 
hils a different way of modeling  the variation be tween control points and 
produces a  map surface with a distinctive appearance. Although it is 
beyond the scope of this paper to address be nefits and liabilities of each 
interpolation me thod, consideration of these factors is an im-portant 
ca rtographic endeavor, and the  reader is referred  to an excellent summary 
of interpolation methods written by Burroughs (1986, pp. 147-166). 

Inve rse-distance weighting, the interpolation  model used herein, was 

selected for several reasons.  Inverse-dista nce weighting  is a relatively 
simple technique, and due to its simplici ty and availability in existing 
computer mapping software, is commonly used. Widespread application 
of this technique in cartography makes it a  reasonable selection for demon 
stra ting its visual  manifestations. The general adva ntages of using inverse 
di ~ta nce weighting are that computation time is minim al, and the algo 
rithm is relatively easy to understand  (Bu rrough  1986). This last point will 
be discussed later in the section o f this paper dealing with the detailed 
interpretation of changes seen in the maps due to variations in  the interpo 
lati on weighting. 

Most commonly, inverse-dis tance weighting is a  type of moving 

average computation in which intermediate point values are ca lculated as 
an average \'alue of a local neighborhood or ' windm·v' (Burrough 1986). 
Thb aspect is also referred to as ' piecewise' because only a  portion of the 
con trol  points are used to calculate grid values, although all  control points 
arc c;ometimes used in interpolation (Lam 1983). By limiting the number of 
control points selected, local anomalies of the data can be represented 
without affecting the interpolation of other points on the surface 
(Burrough 1986).  However, an inverse-distance weigh ting technique that 
encompasses all control points can be used to create a more generalized 
and smoother surface. 

Because observa tions close together tend  to be mo re alike than distant 

observa tions, distance between control points is a key ele me nt in the 
model. The con tribution of each con trol  point to the local average is based 
on its distance from  the grid location. Distance is incorporated into the 
inn~ rsc-distance \Veighting equa tion as the qu antity d,  as shown in 
cquntion 1. The equation calculates a new data value (Z11ew)  fo r each grid 
intersection  (J)  on  the interpolated surface. The las t va riable to be dis 
cussed, Jnd the most important to this research because its visual effect 
can be observed in  the animations produced, is the weighting exponent 
(1ul J.  As the weighting exponent increases, the influence of nearby points 

Inverse  Distance Weighting 
( weighting = 2 ) 

Kriging 

Minimum Curvature 

Fig11l"I'  .:?.  Fn1m)'i<'s  of" rnr111/1<111:<  111  tlirce 
di111c11,1c•1111/  'ill/rl<"<'S  rcs11/f111g frp111  f/1rec 
diftl-r<'lll 111lt'r/l<'illlio11  111cflw1I-.  011111  lllllJ'pt•d 
11re  f(ltal /11/11.  /995)'r1•Lip1tal1c>11.f(11·1\'ebmskr1. 

30 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

"Maps thus generated can  be 
played back as a frame-by-frame 
animation, and the effects of 
differences in  the weighting 
exponent can be observed." 

I  (Zi/d/vt) 
I: (l/d.wt) 

l 

where: 

Z  = z value 
d  =distance 
wt  = weighting value 

Equation 1.  /11verse  Distance Weighting  Eq11atio11 

on the local average also increases while the influence of more distant 
points decreases. Emphasizing nearby points creates more peaks and 
valleys in the surface in contrast to the smoother appearance resulting 
from the use of a low weighting exponent which gives distant points more 
numerical equity in the computation. 

A single set of data values located at control points can be subjected to 

inverse-distance weighting interpolation and then, by incrementally in 
creasing (or decreasing) the weighting exponent in small numerical steps, 
a sequence of maps showing weighting exponent effects on visual surfaces 
can be generated. Maps thus generated can be played back as a frame-by 
frame animation, and the effects of differences in the weighting exponent 
can be observed. This can be done for either isoline or three-dimensional 
maps, but only three-dimensional maps are used in this research. The 
mapmaker, after a thorough examination of the animation, can then 
choose the map deemed most appropriate for the mapping purpose at 
hand, or the model or theory being examined . This type of visualization 
through animation can serve as a map-design tool whose utility extends 
well  beyond visualization of weighting exponent effects and into numer 
ous other arenas of map design, in ways that Peterson first explored in his 
sequencing experiments with choropleth maps (Peterson 1993). 

Constructing the Animations 

Data  for  the animations was acquired from weather stations across the 
state of Nebraska. A total of seventy stations were used. At each of these 
control points (locations shown in Figure 3),  precipitation for the month of 
July,  1995 was recorded. Animation frames were created in SURFER, v 4.5 
(Golden Software 1990), and then imported into Animator Pro, v 1.2 
(Autodesk, Inc. 1991) for playback. Figure 4 shows a selection of frames 
from  two of the animations that were eventually constructed. 

Control points used in the animation were selected because these 

climate stations have fairly  uniform spacing throughout the mapped area. 
Inverse-distance weighting interpolation is easily affected by non-uniform 

1.47 

1 24 

087 

• 
• 
•  138 
• 
•  • 

• 

1.58 

I 69 

3.14 

• 

• 

1.9 

I 53 

2.95 

47 

2.21 

201 

229 

333 

2.99  • 
• 
• 
• 
•  1.87 
• 
•  •  2.22 
• 
• 
• 
2 13  • 
•  1
• 

1.9• 

2 14 

1 71 

26 

:

1.57 

• 

146 

1.8 

1.4 

1.4 

1.74 

3.98 

188 

1.63 

2.28 

2.56 

0.93 

4.35 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 
•  •  2 61 
• 
•  •  2.05 
• 
•  2.34 
• 
• 
• 1.1 
• 
• 
•  • o.9 
•  •  • 
• 
• 
•  1.16 
• 
•  • 
• 
1.47  • 
• 

•  • 
• 
•  3.n 

• 

2.34 

0.97 

2.65 

335. 

095 

2.35 

2.53 

2 25 

1.33 

1.03 

2.17 

1.46 

2.64 

3 25 

0 74 

2 01 

.89 

0.8 

I 

1.59 

• 

I 7 

·- • 

2.26 

2 75 

• 

5.64 • 

212• 

Figure 3.  Location of co11trol points and associated total /11/y,  1995 precipitation  values for  the maps. 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

31 

WT=1 

WT=1 

WT=2 

WT=2 

WT=3 

WT=3 

WT=4 

WT=4 

WT=5 

WT=5 

WT=6 

WT=6 

METHOD=ALL 

METHOD=NORMAL 

Figure 4.  Frames  scle«tcd from  a11i11111lio11;;.  A11i111atio11s  /inpr a Iola/ vf120 fr11111e:<.  The  method 
,.de,.red lo  as  ALL 11'.'cs  ali co11 trol poi11I «alue,;  i11  iim:rs,• disfm1cc <i>;ig1ttii1g. The  mctlrvd rcfa,wl to 
as NOR.lvlAL  11:<es  a rcgii•11al selecf1011Lfco11trol17vi11ts based 011  a sclecf1,111of11ear-11eighl>ors.  \.\Tis 
f/1e  weigl1liJ1S  <'Xi'OJICl/f. 

distributio ns of control points because equal weights are assigned  to each 
point even if it is in a cluster (Lam 1983). In reality,  the mapmaker does not 
ah vays have control over the locations of control points, but for  the 
purposes of this s tud y it \.Vas d esirable to avoid  the effects of uneven or 
clustered a rrangements. 

One long-standing,  useful, and often viola ted con ven tion in g ra phics 

and cartography maintains that the selection of symbols for ma ps and 
graph s should  reflect the nature of data to be mapped (Tufte 1983, 

"One long-s ta nding,  useful, 
and often violated convention in 
graphics and cartography 
maintains that the selection  of 
symbols fo r maps and graphs 
should refl ect the nature of data 
to be mapped. " 

32 

cartograplzic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

Robinson and Petchenik 1976, Dobson 1973). When studying the effects of 
inverse-distance weighting in three-dimensional animations, continuous 
data is most appropriate for visualization. Precipitation is a truly continu 
ous geographic phenomena, and for  that reason was chosen for anima 
tions in this study. 

Individual animation frames (maps) were constructed in SURFER by 
entering control point x,  y locations, and corresponding z-values (precipi 
tation) for the seventy climate stations, and then computing the inverse 
distance grid interpolation. For each successive frame,  the weighting 
exponent was increased by a value of 0.05. This fairly small increment was 
chosen to produce a smoother animation, and one which lasted a sufficient 
length of time to allow examination of the visual effect of increasing 
weights. An attempt to utilize an increment of 0.1  was made but rejected 
because the animation appeared too discontinuous and jumpy between 
successive frames.  Weighting exponents ranged from 0 .05 to 6, stopping 
at 6 because higher weights produced little change in the three-dimen 
sional surface. This exponent range and numerical increment yielded a 
total of 120 frames. 

Most visual parameters were set and remained constant throughout 
production of individual frames for each animation. In order to examine 
the visual effect of other interpolation settings, some of these settings were 
varied between animations. Uniform vertical scaling was used in  all 
animations, and was selected by first displaying the surface with the 
greatest vertical relief (wt=6},  adjusting the vertical scalar until no clipping 
of the surface at the edge of the screen occurred, observing the numerical 
index of the vertical scalar (in  this case, an index of 1.5), and then setting 
all  subsequent frames to that index value. Angle of view from  the horizon 
and horizontal rotation of the surfaces were set, and also remained con 
stant throughout the animations. Angle of view was set at 45 degrees 
above the horizon, and horizontal rotation at 235 degrees ( 0 being a view 
due west). For the precipitation data used in this study, this orientation 
was chosen because it was the best for revealing the peaks, valleys, and 
spatial trends of this rather complex surface, while it also minimized 
hidden surfaces. Once initial settings were determined, individual frames 
were produced and screen-captured to GIF file format at 640 by 480 
resolution. Frames were then imported into Animator Pro for playback. 
Two variations of the animations are shown in Figure 4. Settings, as 
described above, are the same for each animation; the only variation is in 
the way control points were searched for and selected for interpolation. 
METHOD=ALL indicates that all control points were used to derive the 
interpolated surfaces, but they were still subjected to inverse-distance 
weighting. METHOD= NORMAL indicates that the number of control 
points was restricted to a set number of neighboring control points within 
a specified radius. One can observe that the animation produced as ALL 
has slightly smoother surfaces when lower weighting exponents are used. 
However, the surfaces rapidly become similar as weighting exponents 
increase. Further experiments with other search settings revealed  the same 
trend. Weighting exponents greater than four produced surfaces that 
appear to be identical. It was also observed that vertical relief increases as 
weighting exponents increase because increasingly greater weights are 
applied to fewer control points. This occurs regardless of control point 
search and selection methods. 

These observations are indicative, but not exhaustive of the utility of 
this sort of visualization, and the conclusions derived from our observa 
tions would have been difficult to arrive at by any other means. Selection 
of individual maps to be representative of an animation series will ulti-

"Weigh ting expo11e11 ts greater 
thn 11 Jou r produced su rfnces  that 
appear to be identical.  It was 
also observed that vertical relief 
i11creases as ·weighting expo-
11e11ts increase because increas 
ingly greater weights are ap 
plied to fewer control points. 
This occurs regardless of control 
point search and selection 
methods. " 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

33 

mately be determined by the author' s purpose and goal, statistical consid 
erations, the intended audience, and the author's knowledge of the 
geographic phenomena being mapped. In this regard, design-oriented 
animations can assist authors in  making more informed map selections. 

Animation-assisted map design is a promising tool for cartography, and 
can be extended \Nell  beyond animation of the visual effect of inverse 
distance weighting on three-dimensional mapping. Virtually all variables 
encountered in designing and constructing three-dimensional surfaces can 
be animated, including data search procedures used in g ridding, surface 
rota tion, vertical scaling, and horizontal angle of view. The greatest 
potential for this method lies in examining design decisions whose conse 
quences are difficult to visualize mentally, such as those dealing with the 
mathematics of grid interpolation. Jn a further example of related uses of 
animation, Figure 5 shows frames from an animation in  which on ly the 
density of the interpolated grid is varied. Mapmakers can examine this 
animation to determine an appropriate level of grid-based generalization 
for  the final  product. The first  frame (top) shm.vs a surface that is made 
from a grid that b  loo coarse to give an adequate impression of a continu 
ous surface, while the last frame's surface is made from a grid so fine that 
line svmbols coalesce and obliterate portions of the surface. The animation 
shows  that neithe r of these two choices, nor some of the other frames, 
would be appropriate. Hmvever, the actual selection of a surface must be 
made in consort with the purpose of the map, the mapmaker's intentions, 
and statistical guid elines, such as the error generated by interpolation. 
Animation-based design is not limited to examination of three-dimen 
sional surfaces,  and could just as easily be employed in examining design 
variables in isoline, choropleth, dot, and graduated symbol mapping, as 
well as other forms of symbolization, (DiBiase et al.1992).  fn  order to 
become a  truly useful design tool, creation of frames for animations 
should be automated, and the means for selecting variables for animations 
should be interactive and employ a graphic user interface (GUI). 

Automated map generation is desirable because the construction of 
animatio ns manually, one frame at a time, is a costly and time-consuming 
process. Unless animations can be produced automatically by interfacing a 
geographic data base vvith  map construction software, animation-based 
design is not likely to be widely employed by cartographers.  Availability 
of automated animation would provide a  means to quickly construct and 
playback animations, make design decisions, and if a single map is de 
sired, to produce the most appropriate map for display or publication. 
The addition of interactivity and graphic user interfaces to auto 

an.imation software gi\·es even greater utility to animation-based design 
and e\.ploratory data analysis as well (Peterson 1995, Lodding 1983). The 
interface should pe rmit users to make design decisions by selecting data; 
interpolation method; design elements, either singly or in combination, to 
be varied through animation; legend structure and other ancillary map 
elements; and the number of frames. It should then render the animation 
and permit playback. The interface should allow the user to change 
animation s peed, reverse  the animation, pause and resume, and possibly 
to query the numerical geographic data base. Finally, the interface should 
permit the user to record their selections and produce a final  map. In order 
for animation to become a  robust means for design-based visualization, it 
is essential that these capabilities be repeatable. When this occurs, cartog 
raphy will be closer to utility in the use of animation in  map design and 
data exploration . 

CONCLUSION 

X=20 

X=40 

X=60 

X=80 

X=100 

X=120 

X=140 

F(-.:11 rc 5.  Frames  o:clt'cted  from  1111  111111111111011 
;d11d1  l'ill"lf> de11;;itu of tl1t• i11tap1•/alt'd gn.t 
lt:'IU\!  i11~·cr .. ,·-d1.;;ta;1c; i.Peiglrl111g.  Tlic 
H·cisl1ti11...;  ,·.1po11t·111  i;; 2.  X n:/er,;  lo t/1<'  111111tl11•r 
ol ~nd i11 lch·ctit>11s 011  t l1c lwri:o11 tal a.1is. 

34 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

REFERENCES 

Autodesk, Inc.  1991. Animator Pro. Version 1.2. Sausalito, CA. 

Burrough, P.A. 1986. Principles of Geographical Information Systems for 
Land Resource Assessment. Oxford:Clarendon Press. 147-165. 

Campbell, CS. and Egbert, S.L. 1990. Animated Cartography: Thirty Years 
of Scratching the Surface. Cartographica 27(2):  24-46. 

Di Biase, D.,MacEachren, AM., Krygier, J.B., and Reeves, C. 1992. Anima 
tion and the Role of Map Design in Scientific Visua lization. Cartography 
and Geographic Information Systems 19(4):201-214. 

Dobson, \ifichael. 1973. Choropleth Maps Without Class Intervals? Geo 
graph ic Analysis 3:358-360. 

Golden Software, Inc. 1990. Surfer. Version 4.15, Golden, CO. 

Jenks, George and Crawford, Paul. 1971. Viewing Points for Three Dimen 
sional Mapping. Technical Report NR389-146, Office of Naval Research. 
Washington, D.C. 

Lam,  Nina Siu-Ngan. 1983. Spatial Interpolation Methods: A Review. The 
American Cartographe r 10(2):129-149. 

Ladding, Karl. 1983. Iconic Interfacing. IEEE Computer Graphics and 
Applications 3(2):11-20. 

MacEachren, Allan. 1995. How Maps Work: Representation, Visualization, 
and Design, New York: The Guilford  Press. 

MacEachren, Allan and Ganter, J. 1990. A Pattern Identification Approach 
to Cartographic Visualization. Cartographica 27(2):64-81. 

Monmonier, Mark. 1982. Computer-Assisted Cartography:Principles and 
Prospects, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:Prentice-Hal l. 

Peterson, Michael. 1993. Interactive Cartographic Animation. Cartography 
and Geographic Information Systems 20(1 ):40-44. 

Peterson, Michael. 1995. Interactive and Animated Cartography. 
Englewood Cliff, NJ:Prentice-Hall. 

Robinson, Arthur and Petchenik, Barbara. 1976. The Nature of 
Maps: Essays Toward Understanding of Maps and Mapping. Chicago, 
University of Chicago Press. 

Rowles, Ruth A.  1978. Perception of Perspective Block Diagrams. The 
American Cartographer 5(1 ):31-44. 

Sampson, Robert. 1979. Surface III Graphics System. Lawrence, KS:  Kansas 
Geological Survey. 

Tufte,  Edward. 1983. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. 
Cheshire, CT: The Graphic Press. 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

35 

Decision-Making with Conflicting 
Cartographic Information: The Case of 
Groundwater Vulnerability Maps 

Conflicting cartographic information can cause problems when used to 
support planning decisions. Creation of conflicting information is 
b ecoming more common as geographic visualization and modeling 
software are used to develop multiple maps that represent different 
views of the same data. This pap er p resents groundwater vulnerability 
mapping as an example of information conflicts of this type. Three 
different vul nerability models applied to the same test data produced 
radically d ifferent results. Th is in formation was presented to a group of 
local planners to examine how th ey would deal with th e conflicts. 
Through this exercise it became apparent that each planner used highly 
individual criteria to evaluate the results from the models. A continuum 
of strategies describ es the range of responses from aspatial to s patial 
approaches. Jung's theory of psychological types is applied to further 
understand variation in responses. A venues for further research are 
suggested in the representation of cartographic information conflicts, the 
role of psychological types in d ecision-making with maps, and the role 
of group d ynamics in decision -making with maps. 

C onflicting visual informa tion in cartographic representations is a 

potential proble m in all ma p displays and geographic analyses. The 
use of multiple rep resentations fo r both dis play and analysis has become 
common practice with the widespread  use of geographic visualization and 
analysis software (e.g., geographic info rmation systems - GIS). These 
software  products aid  in the gene ration of many differe nt views o f one 
d ata set, the comparison of different d ata sets, the use of d ifferent methods 
fo r processing data, a nd the construction of different analytical models. 
The use of these tools for purposes of visualization p rovides a context 
throug h \-v hich many additional insights about a topic may be gained. 
In this paper, the question of conflicting information in ca rtographic 
d isplays is pursued in orde r to assess va riations in map use strategies and 
interpreta tions when information is contradictory. This issue became 
appa rent d uring a project that investiga ted  the use of GIS for implement 
ing three d iffe rent ground water vulnerability  models from the same d ata 
set (Rader and Janke, 1995). Diffe rent representations of g rou nd water 
vulnerability effectively illustrate the use of multiple views as suggested 
by Tu fte (1990), Muehrcke (1990), and Monmonie r (1991 ),  since maps 
p roduced  w ith these mod els su pposedly represent 'similar' information. 
However, the maps (see Figure 1.) a re quite dissimilar, and the conclusions 
deri ved  from thei r use may be contradictory . Visual information conflicts 
such as these may be common  to many GIS analyses. 

Maps produced  from ground wa ter vulnerability assessments are a 
primary info rmation source employed  by decision make rs in developing 
landuse po licy. Decision make rs often have neithe r the original data no r 
the knowledge to assess the validity of the different mod els. In many 
cases, decision makers fa il  to d istinguish between  the maps and the 
models that they represent. With increased  use of GIS and modeling 
techniqu es, multiple maps re presenting 'similar'  information will likely be 
available and produce information conflicts for d ecision  makers. Ulti 
mately, know led ge about how people resolve problems with conflicting 

Charles P.  Rader 
Department of Geography 
Univ. of Wisconsin - River Falls 

Jam es  D. Janke 
Department of Community 
Resource Development 
Univ.  of Wisconsin - Extension 

INTRO DUCTION 

"In many cases, decision makers 
Jail  to distinguish between the 
maps and the models that they 
represent. " 

36 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

visual information should provide strategies for improving both carto 
graphic displays and users' interpretations of these displays. To examine 
this question, a map use exercise based on maps from different groundwa 
ter vulnerability models was presented to a group of local  planners, 
elected officials, and groundwater specialists. 

The first part of this paper describes the vulnerability models, the 

context for their use, and a more formal problem statement. An overview 
of the map use exercise and the results are then presented. Finally, issues 
pertaining to the strategies that decision makers employ for dealing with 
visual information conflicts are discussed. In approaching this study, it is 
hoped that concrete recommendations can be provided on how to resolve 
information conflicts between maps. However, the participants' disparate 
responses indicated that the fundamental role of maps in decision-making 
was at issue and that diverse approaches to problems of conflicting 
information were in operation. Parallels with Jung's psychological typol 
ogy are drawn upon to help understand variations in decision-making 
strategies. Finally, avenues for further research are suggested. 

Conflicting Visual Information in Cartographic Representation and 
Planning 

The potential for conflicting cartographic representations appears in 
several ways. The desirability of multiple maps for purposes of visualiza 
tion has been documented by several authors. Tufte (1990) noted that 
small multiple maps are well suited for time series data; Monmonier 
(1991) suggested that multiple views of a geographic data set are more 
truthful (i.e., ethical) because they provide a comparative frame of refer 
ence; and Muehrcke (1990, 9) observed that a more thorough understand 
ing may be obtained by using several different maps created from the 
same set of data. However, while additional insights may be generated 
through multiple views, visual information conflicts may arise if views 
display contradictory information. The question that should be asked is, 
what happens when map users are presented with conflicting or contra 
dictory information? 

Little work has addressed the problem of conflicting visual information 

between multiple cartographic displays. Typically, cartographic studies 
have examined map similarity and pattern comparison (Olson 1972, 
Monmonier 1974, Lloyd and Steinke 1976, Peterson 1985, and MacEachren 
and Ganter 1990). These studies have examined perceived relationships 
between several maps, impacts of map complexity, and map similarity. 
While these have provided a background for understanding the perceptual 
characteristics of map displays, the question of conflicts in information 
content between several maps remains. This becomes increasingly impor 
tant in geographic information processing technologies where multiple 
displays may be produced from  the same data set. For example, different 
views may be accomplished through changes in classing and symboliza 
tion schemes or the combination of multiple layers in overlay analysis. 
Wood (1992,  186) suggests that presenting multiple "relationships 

constituted by the interplay of the data" is a desirable artifact of the 
mapping process. Muehrcke (1990) has extended this discussion to include 
the idea of "map stability." Map stability refers to whether or not changes 
in the way data are processed or symbolized have an impact on the 
message perceived. However, what happens when views directly conflict 
with one another? While seeing small differences in representations 
illustrates the impact of cartographic methods on displays, seeing large 
differences may call into question both cartographic and modeling meth 
ods and possibly their ultimate utility. 

" ... wlrat happens when  map 
users are presen fed  with con 
flicting or co11 trad ictory infor 
mation?" 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

37 

"While individual data layers 
may luwe high map stability, 
the fi11al  111aps  made from 
different models may be 
unstable." 

Planning involves the design and consideration of a series of alterna 
tives.  Monmonier (1991) reviewed the use of maps in zoning and environ 
mental protection. Ylaps serve as tools for making planning decisions and 
communicating a  plan's spatial implications.  In  DiBiase's (1990) con 
tinuum o f visual thinking and visual communication, planning maps 
operate in  both the private and public realms. The maps are used in 
planning policy decisions, essentially a thinking ta sk, and in presenting 
planning  policy decisions, essentially a communication task. In this 
context,  the power of maps to persuade should not be overlooked (Harley 
1989, Wood  1992). The 'official'  nature of maps often operates at a subcon 
scious level. 

Monmonier (1991, 71) notes that "without maps, planning would be 
chaotic, furth ermore even with maps, many would argue that planning is 
chaotic." In  add ition, he comments that errors in map compilation can be 
significant and that the same information is often used  to develop differ 
ent plans (Monmonier 1991 ).  Pla1ming scenarios ofte n involve creating 
different conceptual models about a future reality. Different scenarios can 
often produ ce markedly different results. The 'stability' of results may be 
re-framed with the concept of 'model stability.' Model stability describes 
how representations change through the use of different models for 
combining data layers that were processed using the same cartographic 
methods.  This is a case common to many GIS analyses that employ 
different conceptual models for describing a process. While individual 
data la yers may have high map stability, the final  maps made from 
different models may be unstable. The inherent stability or instability of 
the models may influence how decisions are m ad e with different maps. 
The implementation of different models therefore has the potential to 
produce information conflicts. Conflicting information is a major source of 
chaos in  the p lanning process. 

Groundwater Vulnerability: An Example 

Maps tha t result from  groundwater vulnerability  mod els provide an 
apt example of potential cartographic information conflicts in planning. 
Beginning in the early 1970s, a variety of vulnerability models were 
developed in response to environmental concerns about drinking water. 
Significant health effects from drinking contaminated water have been 
docume nted; these include cancers (Armijo 1981; Lee and Nielsen 1987; 
Canter 1987),  blue-baby disease (Lukens 1987), and central nervous system 
birth defects (Scragg et al. 1982). By the mid-1980s,  it became apparent that 
planning and management tools were needed to  identify places that have 
hi gh vulnerability to contamination (Aller et al.  l 985). 

Several types of m od els have been developed to assess vu lnerability. 
These models can be grouped into four major categories:  hydrogeologic 
setting  models, parameter ·weighting /scoring models, empirical models, 
and simulation models (Geraghty &  Miller, Inc. and  ICF, Inc. 1990). 
Hydrogcologic setting models use qualitative site-based assessments to 
rank the relative vulnerability of different areas with varying geomorphic, 
geological, and ground water characte ristics. Parameter weighting I scoring 
models numerically rank and '"reight susceptibility facto rs and calculate 
relati ve vu lnerability scores for areas w ith different hydrogeologic charac 
teristics. \IVeights are often assigned to account for  variations in the 
relative importance of factors in particular situations,  e.g., areas with thin 
soil.  Empiri cal  models use data that relate knO\·Vn occurre nces of contami 
nan ts in groundwater to hydrogeologic characteristics through the applica 
tion of leaching models or statistical inference.  Finally, simu lation models 
attempt to p redi ct contaminant leaching through interactions beho\leen 

38 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

hydrogeologic characteristics and contaminant fa te, such as dilution, 
breakdovvn, absorption, and volatilization (Geragh ty & Miller, Inc. and 
ICF, Inc. 1990, 6-1) . 

.\1ost of the model s that ha ve been applied in the context of GIS have 

been hydrogeologic setting or parameter weighting / scoring models. 
DRASTIC (Aller e t al. 1987) is a gene ral-purpose, parameter weighti ng 
model that was developed for the US  EPA fo r vulnerability assessments at 
county and state levels. Severa l other models have been developed for 
state-wide assessments, including the Wisconsin Susceptibility Model 
(WISM) (Schmidt 1987), which uses weighted hydrogeologic characte ris 
tics to mode l vul ne rability, a nd a n aquifer vulne rability model of Michigan 
(Lusch et al.  1992),  w hich uses hydrogeologic characteristics for d etermin 
ing  relative risk. All  of these mod els use a combination of data layers that 
include soil, subsurface geomo rphic cha racteristics, geology, recharge 
rates, and topography. 

Little resea rch has addressed differences in model performance. The 
authors of the mode ls often state  that resu lts from different models are not 
directly compa rable (Aller et. al 1985; Schmidt 1987). Furthermore, Mer 
chant (1994) notes that there is little validation of these models in the 
contex t of GIS and that there are a  number of questions concerning the 
impact GIS processing methods have on model performance.  Rader and 
Janke (1995) imple mented several models popular in Wisconsin to address 
the question of model differences. In applying the models, the data layers 
and processing methods were held constant so that variations in the 
results were due to d ifferences in model design. 

Three models were used: SCAM (Soi l Contamination Attenuation 

Model) (Zaporozec 1985),  WISM  (Wisconsin Susceptibility Model) 
(Schmidt 1987),  and DRASTIC (Aller et al.  1985). All are parameter scor 
ing/weighting models that use several data layers, although not all 
models use all  of the layers, nor do they consistently weight the  layers. 
Maps de ri ved  from  the three models for a site in St. Croix County, Wiscon 
sin are displayed in Figure 1. The basic problem is that even when using a 
common data set processed  in the same way, the  results are vastly differ 
ent. It is important to reiterate that the models' developers state that the 
models are not directly comparable.  Regardless, it is likely that the maps 
represent the same thing to the lay person and many decision-makers. 
Statistical ana lysis of the relationships between the models further 

corroborate the  visual disparities (Table 1.). Correlation coefficients 
demonstrate little or no relationship in  the SCA.\1 -DRASTIC pair and 
very weak relationships in DRASTIC-WISM and WISM-SCAM pairs. The 
comparison map and coefficients of areal correspondences between the 
models indicate complete divergence over 22 percent of the area, with 
similar ratings between two of the three models over 70 percent of the 
area, and complete correspondence over 7 pe rcent of the area. The coeffi 
cient of areal correspondence only ind icates agreement or disagreement 
across the models. Therefore, the models produce conflicting risk ra tings, 
both graphically and statistically. 

Maps produced from  these assessments are often the primary informa 

tion used by officials for making land use policy decisions concerning 
groundwater. Often, officials neither have the data nor the knowledge to 
assess the validity of the models. This has led  to the following question: 

Given that groundwater vulnerability  models  p roduce different results 
and,  therefore,  different maps, how d o decision  make rs  respond w hen 
confronted with conflicting cartographic information? 

"The basic problem is that eue11 
when  using a common data  set 
processed in the same Wat/,  the 
results are vastly different. " 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

39 

DRASTIC 

SCAM 

l\"k  J'.,1,  111111  'D P.  ' "Tll :;, 

n  f\:1)l lc1  t1 1 H1g,h 

~:n1 lc1 1 11 ·  l  1>\\ 
l ()\\ 

WISM 

P."k  P u l e n1 11l  hl '. \~l j 
- H·.•~h 

~d1)1 l1· 111 1 ·  H1.':.!.li 
~lu dl· 1 1 l e l  u \ \> 

COMPARISON 

- - ..  ( 

-- -.  -

~·  •, ) 

i! 

' 

' 

I 

r 

\ 

••  ~ ' )  / 

; 

' 

\ 

. 
. 

~- ~ "'..___.. 
. 
. 
~~ ":i/ 
'  ....  " 

R1,k  1'u1t 1111,J 

'.\'! '- \I 

- H 1.~J. 
~ f\l11 dn  )ll  H 1.1~h 

l  1>\\ 

Figure 1. Gro1111d1mfa  V11/m•rnbility M odel  Results 

(  1J 1 1 1 1.op1 11 ul nu , .  ( ·,it  ii11  It  n 1 

tip  ~  '-.: 11t11" 
l'ai1 11l 

ti (, 

In asking  this question, an attempt is made to understand how visual data 
impact decisions, especially where multiple views of the data present 
conflicting information. 

In order to examine the impact that conflicting visual information has on 
planning decisions regarding groundwa ter protection, the study was de 
signed using the three conflicting maps seen earlier in Figure L While the 
models are not explicitly designed for site-level assessments, they serve a 
function in screening sites for further consideration. In all cases, a site-level 
assessment would need to be conducted prior to a final decision. 

Thirteen local decision makers participated in the map-use exercise. 
These people \.Vere chosen because they represent typical users of vulner 
ability maps in planning-based decisions. The participants included five 
planners,  three local government board members, two geologists, one civil 
engineer, one developer, and one farmer. Only three of the thirteen 

METHODS 

"While the models are not 
explicitly designed for site-level 
assessments, they serve a 
function  in screening sites for 
further consideration." 

40 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

Correlation Coefficients 
(standardized unclassed scores) 

Coefficient of Areal Correspondence 
(classed scores) 

SCAM-DRASTIC 

0.049 

None 

DRASTIC-WISM 

0.279 

Partial 

WISM-SCAM 

0.311 

Complete 

22.4% 

70.3% 

7.3% 

Ta/1/c 1.  Rclatio11slrips  /1efwee11  Gro1md1mfer  V11l11erability M odels 

"The exercise had the partici 
pants identify potential sites for 
/rouses  using the information on 
grou 11dwater vulnerability for 
each of three different maps." 

"Participants were then asked to 
describe /row  they would resolzie 
the i11formation  conflicts 
betwee11  the maps, considering 
that tire  maps represented the 

same area. 

participants had significant experience with groundwater vulnerability 
models and mapping. 

The exercise had the participants identify potential sites for houses 
us ing the information on groundwater vulnerability for each of three 
different maps. Each map was divided into four quadrants. Participants 
were asked to assume that all sites were equally accessible within each 
quadrant and that each site would have its own well and septic system. 
For each map, they also rated the vulnerability for each quadrant, chose 
the best location for a house in each quadrant, and selected the overall best 
quadrant for a house. A sample test page is reproduced in Figure 2. From 
these questions, information on perceived relative vulnerability levels and 
locational  behavior were obtained. Such site selection problems are 
realistic and critical tasks for planners. 

The three specific task questions were: 

1)  Based on this map, rate the average risk for groundwater contami 

nation in each of the four quadrants using the scales below. 

2)  Based on the information o n the map above, mark the best location 
for a house in each quadrant with a dot. Assume that all locations 
are equally accessible and that each house will have its own well 
and septic system. 

3)  Examine the map above. Which quadrant contains the most 

desirable location for a house? You must choose one. 

ln designing the test pages, the three maps were simply labeled as 
Areas 1, 2,  and 3. Since the vulnerability maps had extrem ely low correla 
tion coefficients (0.049 - 0.311), the maps were not rotated or flipped  to 
mask that the maps represented the same area. In general, as the correla 
tion coefficient of the map pairs falls below 0.84, it becomes increasingly 
more difficult for subject to judge similarity (Olson 1972). None of the 
participants noticed that the maps represented the same area during the 
exercise. This slight deception was later revealed to the participants and 
formed  the basis for a discussion of how to resolve information conflicts 
between the maps. 

Once the participants answered the three sets of questions, they were 
given a description of how the different maps were constructed using a 
GIS.  At this point, the fact that the three maps represented the same area 
was revealed. Participants were then asked to describe how they would 
resolve the information conflicts between the maps, considering that the 
maps represented the same area. After answering this question individu 
ally, participants were divided into two focus groups for a discussion of 
the models and an opportunity to examine how information conflicts 
might be resolved in a group setting. Each of the authors facilitated one of 
the groups and transcribed the discussion. After the focus groups finished, 
each participant responded to a questionnaire on their previous experi-

Number 29, Winter 1998 

41 

Groundwater Vulnerability Area 3 

Ri11k  Potcnti&l 
High 
-
Moderate High 
-
Moder&Le Low 
-
Low 

O 

300  Feet 

Q~n 1  Build 011  11\i. map.  r1ta tl'le aver-011 rl&k fer groundw919r oonlarrvn.tion "'Heil of th1 tour 
~,.,.,,., 1&11\Q 11\e c;i:;aft below.  (Otcle the number that mo&t closely rnatdlec your tallt\Q) 
.... 
,..-. 

Quadrant 2 

Quadr31ant  1 

..,.• 

,.... 

~ 

~ 

Aver:aoe  lll•ll Aa&oHlllertt  ,  2  a  •  &  • 

Ave,. ltle-AA•Mtll\e11t  1  1  a  •  s 1 

Quadrant 3 

Quadrant 4 

+-I 

,/' 
,., .... 
,,. ... 
..,7 

... / 

.. .... 

"'~ 

..,7 

fl.Med 01111'111  il'll'Drmatlon on die map abava, mark Ille bMt rocat1o11 lor a ho..a l'I eac~ quadrant 

Qu115tion 2 
wih :a dot.  Auume ~:at :all  loe:abor.& :are eqmJly :aeo11&&1bl&  Mid lh:at Nd\ home will !\we b  CNlro  well :and 
WJ>h: 1i)$191TI. 

Oue&tion 3  &arNM the  map ai)ove.  Whrel'I qu:adrw COl\talM the IN>&t des.uable location !or a l'loU&e? 
You !Nllil .moo.a Ol\e .  1  2  3  4 

Figure 2.  Tc::t l'asefor WISM M,1dclfrom  Map  Use Exercise 

e nces with vulnerability maps and models and their uses in landuse 
planning. 

Analysis of \·ariance (A>JOV A) was used to test the relationship between 
the vul nerability  ratings for each quadrant. The results indicated  that the 
participants' a\·erage vulnerability ratings in all but one quadrant '"'ere 
significantly diffe rent (p less than .OS) between most map pairs. (See Table 
2.) Quadrant three (SW) was the only quadrant where the ratings were 
similar between all  maps. Overall vulnerability ratings for each map were 
compared using A.t\OV A, and all map pair comparison s were significantly 
different (p less than  .01). Therefore, the participants' perceived vulnerabil 
ity ratings vvere significantly different. This indicates that the maps exhibit 
a potential for infor mation confli cts. 

Quadrant four (SE)  was judged by the participants to be  the most 
suitable location for a house on a ll  of the maps. This quadrant also re 
ceived the lowest average risk ratings for each o f the maps. This indicates 
that even thou gh  there were significa nt differences in vulnerability ratings 
for this quadrant, it was still  the best general area for a house. In this 

RESULTS 

"The results indicated  that the 
participants' average vulner 
ability ratings in all but one 
quadrant were significantly 
different (p less  than .05) 
betiveen most map pairs." 

42 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29,  Winter 1998 

Quadrant 1 

SCAM-DRASTIC* 

DRASTIC-WISM* 
WISM-SCAM* 

Quadrant 3 
SCAM-DRASTIC 

DRASTIC-WI SM 

WI SM-SCAN 

~ 

Quadrant2 
SCAM-DRASTIC* 

DRASTIC-WI SM 

WISM-SCAM"' 

Qoadrant4 

SCAM-DRASTIC 
DRASTIC-WISM* 

WI SM-SCAM* 

"'SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT at p < .05 

Table 2. V11/11aal1i/1t,11  Rati11gs /1ct11>ee11  Map  Pairs by Q11adrn11t  (ANOVAi 

context, the information content was reasonably stable. In other words, the 
maps produced the same result for the determination of the best quadrant 
for a house although the maps were different. 

The best location for a  house within each quadrant varied by map 
(Figure 3.). It is not surprising that in areas where locational choices are 
constrained, more clustered patterns occur. SCAM and WISM models 
provided high constraints, and therefore the participants'  responses 
tended to cluster. These clusters occurred in different locations in all 
quadrants except quadrant three (SW). The DRASTIC model, in contrast, 
had fewer constraints on location. The patterns produced were dispersed 
in the northern quadrants, and as constraints became more severe, the 
patterns became more clustered in the southern quadrants. The southern 
clusters occurred in different locations on all three maps. 

Differences in both vulnerability ratings and locational preferences indi 
cate that differe nt results would be obtained depending on which map 
was used for analysis. The problem, as stated, is w hat happens when 
people are confronted with two or more maps that present contradictory 
results. It is important to remember that the resu lts produced wi th the 
different models were based upon the same data set, although the models 
incorporated the data in different ways. 

To examine how people deal with conflicting cartographic information, 

the following question was asked: 

Given  that these results were developed from the same data set, for the 
same area,  and y ield conflicting information,  describe how you would 
deal with this in the context of making planning decisions? 
After writing a  response to this question on their own, each participant 
joined a focus group for a discussion. This allowed an examination of both 
individual and group decision-making strategies and to ask additional 
follow-up questions concerning the use of the maps and their utility. 

After examining the individual responses, a number of similarities and 

differences in participants'  comments were noted. Responses varied by 
how important maps were to the decision-making process. Some partici 
pants suggested throwing out the maps completely and using 'common 
sense.' Others defined the problem as political, referring to administrative 
and zoning codes that dictate acceptable procedures and regulations and 
require minimal map use for arriving at a decision. In the middle, some 
participants suggested using a combination of the models or using the 
models as 'advisory to decision-making.' Finally, some participants 
suggested ' improving existing models or developing new models'  that 
would provide more valid maps. 

DISCUSSION 

"Some participants suggested 
throwing out the maps 
completely and using 'common 
sense.'" 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

The importance of the map and spatial approaches to the problem 
varied greatly. These approaches could be characterized by a continuum 
from aspatial to spatial (Figure 4.); with less reliance on the map defining 
the aspatial end and more reliance on the map defining the spatial end of 
the continuum. The implicit assumption at the aspatial end of the con 
tinuum is that the map is unnecessary. Common sense, unreflective 
opinions, or rules-of-thumb fall at the aspatial end of the continuum, 
because they often do not explicitly consider local ecological conditions. 
For example, "everyone knows that you don't put your well next to your 
septic system." While initially these may appear to be spatial approaches, 
these approaches do not involve the evaluation of specific site characteris 
tics. In certain circumstances, for example, in areas with deep wells,  the 
'rule' may have little practical meaning. The issue is that one does not 
need map-based information to apply the rule. The implicit assumption at 
the spatial end of the continuum is that a map is needed, but that the 
existing models need to be refined. 

The question arises, why do people view the utility of maps (and 

models) with such divergence? There are many different possible explana 
tions. One could be that the participants were drawn from a varied pool of 
expertise, and individual differences in background, education, training, 
experience, and decision-making roles could account for these variations. 
Another possibility is that participants placed different interpretations on 
the context of the problem. However, responses from individuals with 
similar backgrounds ranged across the full continuum. For example, the 
planners made comments that ranged across the continuum in spite of 
their similarities in training and decision-making roles. Therefore, it 
appears that individual cognitive style, irrespective of training or context, 
may be a more significant factor in explaining how people deal with 
conflicting cartographic information . 

In the broader context of cognitive psychology and human behavior, 
Jung (1983, 129) also questioned how individuals could interpret the same 
material so differently? Jung concluded tha t people belonged to different 
psychological types and these types accounted for variations in individual 
decision-making processes. The basis of Jung's typology consists of four 
dichotomous variables: introversion/ extra version, intuition I sensation, 
thinking / feeling, and judging/ perceiving. These variables combine to 
form 16 different psychological types. Jung (1983, 132) stated that there are 
never pure types and that all  individuals exhibit varying degrees of all 
characteristics. A type is defined by the predominant mode of behavior. 
Readers may be more familiar with the extension of this work on personal 
ity types by Myers and Briggs (Myers 1962). 

Keirsey and Bates (1984, 23) note that Jung proposed all of the dimen 
sions, but never fully developed the judging I perceiving dimension. Jung 
emphasized introversion / extraversion as the predominant distinction 
between psychological types. Introverts emphasize the inner world of 
concepts and ideas, and extraverts emphasize the outer world of people 
and things (Myers 1980, 7). The other psychological functions describe 
how people perceive, come to conclusions, and come to closure. Intuition 
and sensing, according to Jung (1983, 144), are "the irrational functions" 
and relate to the perception of events or potential events. Intuition in 
volves indirect perception, and sensing involves direct perception through 
the five senses (sight, sound, smell, touch, and taste ). Thinking and feeling 
are "the rational functions"  and relate to how conclusions are made. 
Thinking involves the use of logical processes aimed at an impersonal 
finding, and feeling involves processes based on subjective values (Myers 
1980, 3). The fin al dimension, judging and perceiving,  involves preferences 

43 

DRASTIC 

O  Hou•e locw on  (DRASTIC) 

SCAM 

D  How e. Loution  (SCA M: 

WISM 

Fig11re 3. l'v1ost Desirable Locatio11  for a House 
by Map. 

Aspatial 

Spatial 

combine 

polltlcal 
process 

Fig11re 4. Co11ti11u11111  of approaches for 
ha11d/i11g  c01 ~f] icli11g cartograpl1ic approaches. 

44 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

Aspatial 

Spatial 

Fix 11 r,· 5. C1>11ti111111111  of p.<_11cl10!.1girnl  l!f/'''"  a11d 
::pnf111/  dl'Ci,;1,111-111nki11s. 

"Spatial and aspatial are defined 
solely on  the basis of whether or 
not a map is necessary to the 
decisio11-111aki11g process." 

"/11  group decisions,  people 
cannot ass11111e  that eueryone is 
percei'ui ng and evaluating tile 
data in tile same way and 
therefore will arriz 1e at the same 
decision. " 

for degrees of closure. Judging types prefer closure using the available 
data, and perceiving types defer closure desiring more data. 

Returning to the idea of how participants made decisions using the 
maps, it is possible to arrange several of the psychological functions along 
a continuum from aspatial to spatial (Figure 5.).  This provides a  potential 
framework for explaining the variations in approaches to conflicting 
information on maps. Common sense approaches align with intuition and 
feeling and generally appear to be aspatial, whereas modeling approaches 
align with sensation and thinking and appear to be spatial. Spatial and 
aspatial are defined solely on the basis of whether or not a map is neces 
sary to the decision-making process. Furthermore, intuitive types prefer 
approaches that are figurative and employ approximations; in contrast, 
sensing types prefer approaches that are literal and employ detailed facts 
(Kroeger 1992, 33). Common sense involves "unreflective opinions" (G. & 
C. Merriam 1987, 266),  rather than careful evaluation of facts.  As noted 
earlier, since common sense does not rely explicitly on site-specific criteria, 
the aspatial end of the continuum is defined as being largely intuitive. In 
contrast, the spatial end involves the use of site-specific criteria for evalua 
tion and, therefore, is largely based on sensing. 

It is important to note that these psychological dimensions describe a 
continuum of approaches to decision-making behavior, and each is valid 
in its own right. These define predominant decision-making preferences 
and it is possible for people to shift style in some circumstances. The 
predominant type of introversion I extra version and the functions of 
perceiving/ judging do not appear to play a role in this context. 

Variations in psychological types influence group dynamics in decision 

making. The interaction of contrasting types has the potential for increas 
ing both understanding and misunderstanding. This became apparent in 
our focus group discussions where participants expressed a number of 
contrasting opinions about the utility and necessity of the maps. In group 
decisions, people cannot assume that everyone is perceiving and evaluat 
ing the data in the same way and therefore will arrive at the same decision. 
In the focus groups, we observed contrasts in  psychological types; decision 
makers exhibited both aspatial and spatial behaviors as described above. 
The fact that the maps presented conflicting information may have rein 
forced  each participant's preexisting tendencies toward a psychological 
type. Those that tended toward the aspatial end of the continuum readily 
discounted the validity of the maps and their importance to decision 
making. In contrast, those that tended toward the spatial end of the 
continuum looked for refinements to the models in order to improve the 
maps. In  this situation, the discussions were congenial, since no decision 
had to be made. However, the dynamics in groups that need to make a 
decision are often less congenial. 

At the outset of this project, the application of the Jungian typology was 

not anticipated, however, this typology provides a way to frame the 
problem and provide some explanation. Contrasts in styles have a poten 
tial  for helping to understand how people process and manage conflicting 
information in a cartographic context. In contexts where multiple decision 
makers interact to solve a particular problem, in this case policy concern 
ing groundwater vulnerability, diverse decision-making styles come into 
play. The likely result of varied decision-making styles is multiple out 
comes that are internally consistent to the individual decision makers be 
cause each person frames the problem context according to her / his psy 
chological type. Diverse results should serve as a reminder to those who 
are cartographically oriented that not all  users approach maps with the 
same enthusiasm. This alludes to an issue of how we approach conflicting 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

45 

information as a cartographic problem; the problem is not necessarily a 
question of 'how maps work', but instead, 'how people work with maps'. 

In this paper, results were presented from an experiment that investigated 
how decision-makers respond to conflicting cartographic information 
using a series of conflicting groundwater vulnerability maps for one area. 
Thirteen local decision-makers participated in the experiment, and input 
\·Vas collected from them as to how they would deal with information 
conflicts in a planning situation. The decision-makers then discussed the 
maps and information conflicts in a group settin g to examine how group 
dynamics might influence the decision-making process. From this, a 
continuum of strategies was developed that ranged from  the aspatial 
approaches, e.g., discard the maps and use common sense, to spatial 
approaches, e.g., build a new spatial model that "works." 

When the research was initiated, it was viewed as a problem of carto 

graphic visual information processing and it was anticipated that the 
participants would discuss methods for representing conflicting informa 
tion.  Hmvever, the issue turned very quickly away from  the original maps 
to one of how decisions are made using or, in some cases, not using the 
maps. This allowed the development of a continuum of approaches to the 
problem and a series of questions as to 'vhy such diverse results \·vere 
obtained. It became apparent that very different internal processes were 
employed by the participants to evaluate the map data. The divergence of 
responses suggested that something as fundamental as Jung's psychologi 
cal types may play a  role in how people evaluate map data. 

The results from  this study present several avenues for further research. 

The first a\·enue deals with how to best represent information conflicts 
and uncertainty between multiple maps. With growing reliance on GIS 
modeling in environmental decision-making and issues of inter-model 
stability, methods need to be developed to spatially represent agreement 
and disagreement between models. MacEachren's (1994) suggestions 
provide a starting point for such an investigation. The second avenue 
deals with the role of indi vidua l preferences in decision-making and the 
influence of psychological type on how people work with maps. It is 
apparent from this research that there are diverse ways in ·which individu 
als perceive and understand information and that this may impact the 
decisions which the\· ultimate!\· make. Finallv, a third avenue deals with 
how groups  mal-.e d.ecisions u;ing maps. The' dynamics of individuals and 
groups in the decision-making process are markedly different, and little 
cartographic research has addressed this interaction. 

The role and importance of multiple representations in visualizing 

spatial problems is well documented, however, there needs to be a concern 
with the quality of the information that these multiple ,·iews present. The 
potential for conflicting information in cartographic displays becomes 
quite high when multiple data layers are combined in GIS models. The fact 
that the s<1me data layers may produce markedly different maps \·\'hen 
combined in different combinations or through different models is coming 
to be a real concern for those who deal with environmenta l data and 
decision-making. This concern becomes paramount in  situation s where 
different representations may confuse or obscure understanding rather 
than illuminate it. 

SUYfMARY AND 
CON Cl USIOl\'S 

"However, the issue turned ztery 
quickly away from  the original 
maps to  011e of how decisio11s are 
made using or,  i11  some cases, 
11ot using the 111aps." 

"The role and i111porta11ce of 
multiple represe11tatio11s  in 
visualizing spatial problems is 
well docu111e11ted,  however, there 
11eeds  to be a co11cem ·with  the 
quality of the i11for111atio11  that 
these multiple viezus present." 

We thank the three anonymous re,·iewers for their comments and requests 
for clarification. \Ve also thank Dr. Rik Seefeldt from  the Department of 
Psychology at the L"niversity of Wisconsin - River Falls for assistance with 

ACKt\O\\'LEDGMENTS 

46 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

issues pertaining to psychological typology. All omissions a nd interpreta 
tions however remain our responsibility. 

REFERENCES 

Aller, L., T.  Bennett, J.  Lehr, and R. Petty. 1985. DRASTIC: A Standardized 
System fo r Evaluating Ground Water Pollution Potential  Usin g 
Hydrogeologic Settings. Ada, OK: U.S.  Environmental Protection Agency. 

Armijo, R. et al. 1981 Epidemiology of gastric cancer in Ch ile:  II - Nitrate 
exposures and stomach cancer frequency. lntemational journal of Epidemiol 
ogy 10(1): 57-62. 

Canter, L.  1987. Nitrates and pesticides in groundwater: An analysis of a 
computer based literature search. in D.  Fairchild (ed .) Gro1111d  Water Quality 
a11d Agricultural Practices.  Chelsea, MI: Lew is Publishers. 

DiBiase, D. 1990. Visualization in the earth sciences. Earth and Mineral 
Scie11ces,  Bulletin of the College of Earth and Mineral Sciences, PSU 59(2): 
13-18. 

G. & C. Merriam Company. 1987. Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary. 
Springfield,  MA: G.  &  C. Merriam Company. 

Geraghty and Miller, Inc. and ICF, Inc. 1990. A Review of Methods for 
Assessi11g the Sensitivity of Aquifers to Pesticide Contamination.  Prepared for 
the U.S.  Environmental Protection Agency. 

Harley, B.  1989. Deconstructing the map. Cartographica 27(2): 1-23. 
Jung, C. 1983. The  Essential  f1111g:  selected a11d introduced by Anthony Storr. 
New York,  NY:  MJF Books. 

Keirsey, D. and M. Bates. 1984. Please U11dersta11d Me: Character and Tempera 
ment Types.  5th Edition. Del Mar, CA: Prometheus Nemesis Book Com 
pany. 

Kroeger, 0. 1992. Type Talk at Work.  New York, NY: Delacorte Press. 

Lee, L.  and E.  Nielsen. 1987. The extent and costs of groundwater contami 
nation by agriculture. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 42: 243-248. 

Lloyd, R.  and T. Steinke. 1976. The decisionmaking process for judging the 
similari ty of choropleth m aps. The  American Cartographer 3(2): 177-184. 

Lukens, J. 1987. Landmark perspective: the legacy of well-water methemo 
globinemia. ]AMA: The Journal of the American Medical Associatio11 257(20): 
2793-2795. 

Lusch, D., C. Rader, L. Barrett, and N. Rader. 1992. Aquifer Vulnernbi/ihJ to 
Surface Co11ta111i11ation  in Michiga11,  Map and Descriptive Information. East 
Lansing, MI: Michigan State University, Center for Remote Sensing. (Map) 

MacEachren, A. 1994. Some Truth with Maps: A Pri111er on Symbolizntion and 
Design. Washington, DC: Association of American Geographers. 

MacEachren, A.  and J. Ganter. 1990. A pattern identification approach to 
cartographic visualization. Cartogrnphica 27(2): 64-81. 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

47 

Mercha nt, J.  1994. GIS-based groundwa ter pollution haza rd assessment: A 
critical review of the DRASTIC model. Pl10togrn111111etric  E11gi11eeri11g and 
R('lllOtc Sc11si11g 60(9):  pp. 1117-1127. 

Monmonier, M. 1974. Measures of p atte rn complexity fo r chorople thic 
maps. The A111erica11  Cartographer 1(2): 159-169. 

Monmonier, M.  1991. Ethics and  map d esign : Six stra tegies fo r confron ting 
the trad itional one-map solution. Cartographic  Perspectives 10: 3-8. 

Muehrcke, P.  1990. Cartography a nd geographic info rma tion system s. 
Cartography amt Geographic Infor111atio11  Systems 17(1 ): 7-15. 

Myers, I. 1962. The  Myers-Briggs Type llldicator. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press. 

Mye rs, I. 1980. Gifts  Differing. Pa lo Alto,  CA: Consulting Psycho logis ts 
Press. 

O lson, J.  1972. The e ffects of class interval systems on ch orople th map 
correlation. Tlte Ca11adia11 Cartographer 9(44-49); 122-131. 

Peterson, M.  1985. Evalua ting a map's image. The A111erica11  Cartographer 
12(1):41-55. 

Rader, C.  and J. Janke 1995. Meth od s fo r assessing ground water vulner 
abi li ty in St. Croix County, Wisconsin. Wisconsin Geographical Society 
Annual Meeting, River Falls, Wisconsin. 

Schmidt, R.  1987. Groundwater Co11ta111i11atio11  Susceptibility in Wisconsin: 
Wisc011si11 's Gro1111d1mter Ma11age111e11 t Plan Report No. 5.  Madison, WI: 
Wisconsin Department of Na tu ral  Resou rces. 

Scragg, R.  et al. 1982. Birth defects and  househo ld  ·wate r su pply:  Epid emio 
logical studies in  the Mount Gambier region of South Australia. Medical 
fouma l of Aus tralia 2 (12): 577-579. 

Tufte,  E. 1990. Emiisioning Infor111atio11.  Cheshi re, Connecticut: Graphics 
Press. 

Wood, D. 1992. The Power of Maps. New Yo rk,  NY: Guilfo rd Press. 

Zaporozec, A. (Ed.) 1985. Groundwater Protection  Principles and Alternati7.'es 
for  Rock Co1111ty,  Wisconsin.  Madison, WI: Wisconsin Geological and Natu 
ra l H istory Su rvey. 

48 

I 

reviews 

The Dartmouth Atlas of Health 
Care. The Center for the Evaluative 
Clinical Sciences, Dartmouth Medi 
cal School. John E. Wennberg, Prin 
cipal In vestigator and Series Editor, 
Megan McAndrew Cooper, Editor. 
Chicago, Illinois: American Hospi 
tal Publishing, Inc., 1996. Pp. xiv+ 
230, maps, graphs,  tables. $75 (soft 
cover, academicdiscount, without 
diskettes); S350 (hardcover, with 
diskettes); Sl,300 (hardcover, with 
diskettes, CD-ROM, and all nine re 
gional supplements).  ISBN: 1-
556-18-163-2, soft-cover. (Ordering 
information: AHA Services, Inc., 
P.O. Box 92683, Chicago IL 60675-
2683, 1-800-AHA-2626). 

Re11iewed by: 
Russell S. Kirby, Ph.D. , M.S., F.A.C.E., 
Associate Professor 
Depnrt111e11t of 0/1stetrics n11d 
Gy11ecology 
Mi/u1n11kee Cli11icn/ Cn111p11s, 
UW-Mndiso11 Medical Sc/100/ 

Every now and again a revolution 
ary approach to the processing and 
presentation of information ap 
pears, changing forever the way in 
which the subject matter is viewed 
and understood. The publication of 
The  Dnrt111011th Atlas of Hen/th Cnrc 
may be an example of one of these 
events. In this slender volume (this 
reviewer examined the soft-cover 
academic \·ersion of the atlas; hard 
CO\'er and electronic versions are 
also available), the project team has 
assembled numerous maps and vi 
gnettes representing statistical 
analyses of literally tens of millions 
of hea lth care services, patients, 
and clinicians in a highly readable 
and interpretable format. The atlas 
portrays the current macro-scale 
spatial structure of the American 
health care delivery system and dis 
plays patterns of disease preva 
lence and treatment modalities for 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

numerous health conditions a nd 
diseases. lt may take a generation of 
medical geographers, epide miolo 
gists and health services research 
ers to pursue all of the research 
questions, hy potheses and intuitive 
hunches derived from this single 
publication. 

Most of the maps in the atlas dis 

p lay variations in health-related 
phenomena across hospital referral 
regions. These functional regions 
are aggrega tes of 3,436 hospital ser 
vice areas which were defined 
through an intensive analysis of 
Medicare hospitalization data for 
1992-93 in which five-digit ZIP 
codes were grouped into contigu 
ous regions based on patterns of 
hospital use. A total of 306 hospital 
referra l regions were identified 
through examining w he re residents 
of each hospital service area were 
referred for major card iovascu la r 
s urgery and neu rosurgery. A series 
of d etail maps show the locations of 
each hospital referral region in rela 
tion to major centers of health care 
(p. 25-35).  Ha\'ing defined the hos 
pital referral regions, successive 
sections of the atlas provide detail 
ed maps of acute care hospital re 
sources and expenditu res; hospital 
capacity,  utilization, and outcomes; 
health manpm.ver (physicians); di 
agnosis and surgical treatment of 
common medical conditions. 
There are also sections on 

benchmarking, tabulations of much 
of the data presented in the detailed 
maps, and the strategies and meth 
ods used to develop the information 
and maps in the atlas. Most of the 
maps consist of two facing pages, 
with a standard layout that in 
cludes a national 1~ap •.vith  five in 
sets (San Francisco, Chicago, De 
troit, Washington-Baltimore, and 
New York) \·vi th the distribution of 
values for the phenomenon of inter 
est grouped roughly into quintiles. 
Each discussion also includes a 
distribution graph showing the 
phenomenon of interest as the verti 
cal axis and each hospital referral 
region represented as a filled circle 

of equal size. These graphs show 
not only the degree of dispersion, 
but also whether variation is due to 
relatively few outliers or is widely 
distributed across the nation. The 
text accompanying each map fo 
cuses on w hich hos pital referral re 
g ions had high and low rates, but 
provides little interpretation of the 
da ta displayed. Some context is 
provided e lsewhere. For example, 
prior to the section on spatial pat 
terns in the d iagnosis and surgical 
treatmentofcommonmedicalcon 
ditions, there is a discussion of 
"which surgical rate  is  right?" and 
the issues of underscrvice and the 
role of scientific uncertainty in the 
d eli very of health care services. 
Whi le Tlie Dnrt111011t/1  A tins of 

Hen/th Cnre is an impressive 
achievement, it is not without its 
shortcomings. Foremost among 
these is the failure to include a bib 
liography would link the methods 
used to the literature on hea lth ser 
vices research and medical geogra 
phy, and wou ld connect each sta 
tistical map to its empirica l re 
search base. To aid in interpreting 
the maps \•:ith data across hospital 
referral regions, a map showing 
popu la tions in each region would 
have been useful. Most of the dis 
ease and treatment data are derived 
from the Medicare population, 
which is defined primarily by age 
and almost universal participation. 
Researchers interested in patterns 
of health care use among individu 
als under the age o f 65 wi ll  be dis 
appointed in the minor omission of 
maps for more than 80% of the 
population. There are no maps 
showing patterns of injury or dis 
abi lity, s ur\'ival foll m.ving specific 
treatments, obstetrical procedures 
and outcomes, or spatial variation 
in propensity to use inpatient facili 
ties among the non-elderly. This 
omission is perhaps understand 
able, given the lack of standardized, 
nationwide population-based data 
b,1scs on hospita l services other 
than Medicare, yet there are some 
datasets (national vital s tatis tics 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

cartographic perspectives 

49 

data, fo r example) which, although 
not whollv satisfactorv fo r analvses 
at this scaie, could supply data ' 
\·vi th \·vhich to address some of 
these issues. The section on 
benchmarking, while interesti ng, is 
far too abbreviated to be of use to 
those interested in applying these 
techn iques to the p lan ning or 
evaluation of regionill health care 
delivervsvstems. 

These criticisms notwithstand 
ing,  this atlas is a monumental ac 
complishment which a ll practitio 
ners of health services research or 
med ical geography will w ish to ex 
amine. Geography and map librar 
ies shou ld definitelv add this vol 
ume to thei r holdings, and wi ll  find 
the hardcover edition consulted fre 
quently. Spatial data repositories 
shou ld consider acqui ring the CD 
ROMs \Vi th the deta iled d ata used 
to generate the maps and graphics 
included in the atlas. 

This reviewer looks forward to 
the linkage of spatial  analyses of 
variiltions in health care deliverv to 
decision-making by health care or 
gani,a1tions, insu rers, policy-mak 
ers and health services researchers, 
and to expanded and updated fu 
ture editions of this iltlas. 

Mapping an Empire: The Geo 
graphical Construction of British 
India, 1765-1843. Matthew H. 
Edney. Chicago: CniversityofChi 
cago Press, 1997. Pp. xv+ 340, 
maps, references, biographical 
notes, and index. $35.00 hardback 
(ISB\l 0-226-18487-0). 

Reuiewcd by: 
Dr. W.  Elizabeth f epso11 
Dcpnrf11H'11t of Geosrnplly 
U11il 1crsif!f of Cnl(tim1in nt Los A11seles 

Enlightenment ideals, brute colo 
nial  realities, and practical bureau 
cratic negotiations collide in Mat 
thew Ednev' s historv of carto 
graph ic pr~ctice du~ing late eigh 
teenth and early nineteenth-century 

British imperial expansion in South 
Asia. Considering recent studies on 
the duplicitous role of geography in 
European colonialism, it is not sur 
prising that Matthew Edney has 
closely investigated cartography in 
British Ind ia. His contribution to 
the study of geography and empire 
is to present a sophisticated expla 
nation of mapmaking in Briti sh In 
dia as a cultural, political, and his 
torical product. Rather than a ubiq 
uitous tool for e mpire, ma pmaking 
in the divided bureaucratic context 
was confined, often contradictory, 
and incomplete. The author's nar 
rative brilliantly synthesizes text 
and context -map and motive-
tell a story of how the British map 
ping of India was contingent on a 
variety of competing practical and 
ideological interests. Throughout 
this book, Edney deploys a rigorous 
theore tical analysis on voluminous 
archival material to illustrate the 
central theme in Mnppi11s n11  E111pire: 
A tension between Enlightenment 
epistemological ideals of obsen·a 
tion a nd notions of representation 
were manifested through the actual 
practices of survey and mapmaking 
"on the spot." Moreover, this carto 
gra phic project based on intersect 
ing ideologies of colonialism and 
contrad ictorv ideals of science was 
mediated through colonial institu 
tional negotiation  and historical 
contingencies. 

to 

The first section of Mappi11g n11 
Empire, Edney draws from many 
empirical examples to o utline how 
overarching Enlightenment ideas 
and cu ltural exp ectations of "sci 
ence" influenced colonial practices 
of mapmaking in the ea rl y years of 
British colonialism in South Asia. 
For example, the repor ts by "peripa 
tetic officers" surveying the Indian 
landscape, such as Colin 
Mackenzie's Sun·ey of Mysore 
(1800-1801) and Francis 
Buchanan's Bengal survey (1807-
1814), attempted to achieve the 
ideal of taking a complete inven 
tory. Su rvey of town locations, land 
resources, and rivers, descriptions 

of language and  religion, social and 
economic info rmation, mineralogi 
cal, botanical and zoological inven 
tories were predicated on the notion 
that the surveyor could achieve a 
complete scientific understanding 
of the landscape through this im 
pl icitly cartographic and visual 
framework. According to Edney, ob 
serva tion and reason provided a 
"powerful rhetoric of visi on, em  
piricism, and presence" that but 
tressed the scientific authority of 
imperial cartography (p.75). This 
cultural and ideological expecta 
tion that science must be a rational 
process of compilation set the 
grou nd \"-'Ork for the construction of 
w hat Edney names as the geo 
grap hical "a rchive." Th.is "archive" 
includes representations, im ages, 
narra ti ves, and maps assembled 
and ordered that underpinned the 
larger cultural process of colonial 
ism. 

Scientific expectation also 
framed the conceptual scope, pro 
cess and practice of colonial 
mapmaking. Edney illustrates how 
the British understood vision and 
observa tion in the scientific pro 
cess. H e argues that scientific inves 
tigation was an exercise of power, 
explains how the pictu resq ue land 
scape aesthetic fas hioned images of 
South Asia, and outlines how an 
implicit cartographic framework 
structured geographical narratives 
tha t contributed to the colonial 
archive. Emphasizing the cultural 
and scientific influence of the ca rto 
gra phic perspective on more gen 
eral imperial information gathering 
activities, the author observes tha t 
"geographica l observation im plic 
itly constructs new knowledge 
based on the spatial and distribu 
tion of phenomena, in w hich re 
spect is firmly rooted in the map 
and mapmaking, but observation 
itself is part of the larger knowledge 
discourses constituted by texts, 
maps, images, and stati stical cen 
suses" (p. 46). Through his broad 
overview of British cartographic 
history in South Asia, Edney sup-

50 

cartogmpliic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

po rts the notio n that knowledge is 
intimately linked to power, but he 
grounds this perspective o n de 
ta iled  discussion based on  the spe 
cifics of British colonialism in South 
Asia. 

framework and set in motion a geo 
g raphical certitude that fostered, 
iro nically, practical materia l and 
intellectual anarchy that became 
characteristic of British mapmaking 
in India. 

Edney connects these scientific 

The scientific and cultural ideals 

ideals to imperial realities and 
m oves his a nalysis from how geo 
g raphi cal perspectives fashioned 
images of South Asia to ho w s ur 
veys and cartography were used to 
" discipline" the  Indian landscape. 
Statis tical, astro nomica l, a nd route 
surveys formed the backbone of co 
lo nial cartographic know ledge. 
However, for eig hteenth-century co 
lonial administrators, the potential 
of the survey was o nl y realized 
when it \vas incorporated into a 
larger know ledge base, reconci led 
wi th multiple geographical sources, 
and systematically reconstituted in 
a s ingle encyclopedi c cartographi c 
archive. Yet, according to scientific 
ex pectatio ns, the information was 
obtained o nl y through the inchoate 
and imperfect visio n of the sur 
veyor. For the cartog raphic project 
to progress scientificall y, the sur 
veyors needed to find new, mo re 
comprehensive and "ratio nal" 
methods of mapping the empire. 
What Edney emphasizes is that 
technological change to triang ula 
tion concommitantly transformed 
the practices o f cartography in Brit 
ish India. The innovative trigono 
metrical survey provided the " tech 
nological fix"  to the acknowledged 
imperfect, indirect, often ambig uous 
route s urveys, descripti ve to pogra 
phies, and astronometrical observa 
tions. Triang ulation created a "rig 
orously s tru ctured space" sup 
po rted by mo re accurate ly con 
trolled measurements and provided 
the framework for more detailed 
surveys to be integrated at large 
scales. Trigonome trical surveys or 
d ered  cartographic s pace and disci 
plined the Indian landscape to Eu 
ropea n science. This new expensive 
and time-consuming cartographic 
m ethod red uced the India n land 
scape to a uniformed mathe m atical 

of cartography also met financial 
limits, logistical constraints, institu 
tional inertia, and s tochas tic colo 
nia l realities. Conditions of the co 
lo nial administration circum 
scribed all efforts to cohe re ntly ma p 
India. The divid ed information 
manageme nt system, patronage, hi 
erarchical decision-making appara 
tus, separati on between govern 
mental departments, lack of re 
sources, a nd expanding need for 
geographical information all con 
tributed to a chao tic practice of 
mapmaking. Moreover, these s truc 
tura l constraints exacerbated the 
te nsion between surveyors and 
Company cartographers in Lo ndon 
offices who eventually compiled the 
multifarious s urveys into the single 
vision of India. This permitted a 
"mini-hierarchy" of cartographic 
expertise to form. As Edney writes, 
"The surveyors wo rked at the 
boundary between the uppermost, 
British portion of the pyramid and 
the lowe r foundations sta ffed by 
Eurasians and Indians;  the cartog 
raphe rs functioned close to the pin 
nacle of the pyramid, collecting 
data and disseminating m aps 
downward as necessary" (p. 162). 
Edney focuses o n the Mad ras 
surveys (1 790-1810) to best illus 
tra te the contingent character of 
British cartography as both duplici 
tous in adva ncing British claims on 
indigenous resources and divided 
in its practice. Lack of administra 
ti ve unity was the prevailing char 
acteris tic in the mapping of Ma 
dras. Different motives and visions 
of how to make an accurate and 
comprehensive map in accordance 
with scientific and cultural expecta 
tions characterized this era of 
mapmaking.  o tab le illustrations 
o f this cartographic anarchy are 
Edney's discussion of Colin 

Mackenzie's attempt at a systematic 
topographical survey, William 
Lambton' s trigonometrical survey 
of India's eastern coast, and the in 
ability of the government to create a 
sing le cartographic institution to 
coordinate a comprehensive s urvey 
of southe rn India. These enlighten 
ing examples illustrate how, 
thro ug h detailed archival research, 
one can empirically link interna l 
adm inistrative conflicts and finan 
cial constraints of cartographic 
practice to contested ideas in carto 
g ra phic practice. Edney shatters the 
im age of the ubiq uito us colonial 
s tate unified in purpose, perspec 
tive, and p ractice. With sound em 
pirical evidence, he shows that cu l 
tural expectation of "science" and 
social realties w ithin the British co 
lo nial system had a profound effect 
on the construction of geographical 
knowledge. 

The territorial ex pansion o f Brit 

ish rule during the early nine 
teenth-century demanded a unified 
ca rtographic project to d ea l wi th in 
creased govern mental responsibili 
ties. As a result, the British ins ti 
tuted the Great T ri gonometrical 
Survey to support the publication of 
the Atlas of India.  In the final chap 
ters of Mappi11g an Empire, Edney 
writes a comprehensive his to ry of 
this attempt to m ap "all of British 
India." The Atlas of l11dia  was in 
tended to unify disparate topo 
graphical surveys based on a com 
mon "geometrical g roundwork" of 
the Great Trigonometrical Survey of 
India (GTS).  This framework tha t 
underpinned the Atlas of J11din 
" he ld  the prom ise of a pe rfect geo 
g raphica l panopticon" to combine 
both geodetic science and genera 1 
geography, thus reducing geo 
g raphical data to a uniform refer 
ence (p. 319). The complexity of this 
section is fo und within the empiri 
cal examples of how the unified im 
age of India d eveloped his torically 
within the changing requirements 
of colonial adm inistratio n to rule 
their newly acq uired territory. 
Edney's discussion o n the G reat 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

cartographic perspectives 

51 

Trigonometrical Survey and its in 
stitutional development provides 
the reader with fundamental under 
standing how the character of Brit 
ish cartography in India was con 
tingent on cost and, most of a IL 
practical and ideological compro 
mise. 

Archival synthesis and lucid 
narrative of the ideological, histori 
cal, and technological processes of 
British mapmaking sets a new em 
pirical and theoretical standard for 
both the history of cartography and 
South Asian colonial stud ies. Map 
ping an  Empire takes the analysis of 
maps and pm-ver to a higher level of 
empirical precision and detail. He 
details cartographic practices and 
explains these \Ni thin the context of 
colonial demand and constraint 
with the accuracy of a historian 
and precision of a cartographer. 
The cartographic specialist will ap 
preciate how Edney brilliantly inte 
grates a profound understanding of 
the practical process of mapmaking 
with voluminous archival material. 
His ability to expose important 
practical details of colonial map 
making-from the problems with 
manpower, expense, and time lim 
its-reinforces the broader theme 
that cartography is a highly con 
tested process within divided colo 
nial administration and limited re 
sources. In Mappi11g an  E111pire, 
these logistical constraints are su 
perimposed on the cultural expecta 
tions of science to show how the 
very fabric of geographical knowl 
edge-the map-is socially and po 
litically constituted. For the colonial 
historian or cultural geographer in 
terested in questions of empire and 
geography, Edney demystifies the 
colonial state in the process of im 
perial expansion and brings into 
focus the role of individuals and co 
lonial institutions that have pro 
found effects on how the British 
proceeded to map India. Mapping 
a11  Empire is both a monumental 
contribution to the history of British 
colon ialism and a necessary addi 
tion to the libraries of geographers 

interested in the history of geo 
graphical thought. 

Atlas of Oregon Wildlife: Distribu 
tion, Habitat, and Natural History. 
Blair Csuti, A. Jon Kimerling, Tho 
mas A. O'Neil, Margaret M. 
Shaughnessy, Eleanor P. Gaines, 
and Manuela M. P.  Huso. Corvallis: 
Oregon State University Press, 
1997. 512 pages, 670 maps includ 
ing full-color map insert, 442 illus 
trations. Hardbound, $39.95. (ISBN 
0-87071-395-7) 

Reviewed by ]a111es E.  Meacham 
lnfoGraphics Lab, 
Depart111e11t of Geography 
U11 iversi ty of Orego11 
Euge11e,  Oregon 97405-1251 

The Atlas o_f Oregon Wildlife: Distri 
bution, Habitat, and Natural History is 
a comprehensive publication fea 
turing information on Oregon's 426 
native terrestrial vertebrate species 
that breed in Oregon and 15 intro 
duced species. In the heart of the at 
las there are sections covering Am 
phibians, Reptiles, Breeding Birds, 
and Mammals, with a page dedi 
cated to nearly each of the 441 spe 
cies. Each page contains a two 
color, 1 :4,300,000 scale, range map 
with supporting textual informa 
tion on Global Range, Habitat, Re 
production, Food Habits, Ecology, 
and other relevant facts. Reference 
to Order, Fami ly, State and Federal 
Statu s, Global and State Rank and 
Species Length are also listed. Each 
page contains a finely created line 
drawing of the featured animal. The 
maps display the probable ranges 
where each wildlife species could 
be found, using shaded relief and 
county boundaries as spatial refer 
ence. Csuti states," The m aps pre 
sented here serve as a guide to habi 
tats and general distribution of 
each species." The breadth and 
depth of the information on w ildlife 
presented in this atlas is evidence 
of a major collaborative effort. Many 
organizations are listed in the ac 
knowledgments. Thekeycontribut-

ing agencies include the National 
Biological Service, Oregon Depart 
ment offish and Wildlife (ODFW), 
U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Oregon Natural Heritage 
Program, and the Geosciences De 
partment at Oregon State Univer 
sity. 

The Atlas is well-organized with 

an extensive Introduction describ 
ing Oregon's wildlife and the meth 
ods used in compiling the range in 
formation.  This section also in 
cludes a description of each of the 
30 identified w ildlife habitats of Or 
egon.  Reference maps displaying 
the major transportation network, 
cities, and counties are conve 
niently located just before the spe 
cies range maps. The atlas contains 
a glossary, an extensive reference 
section, a though index, and three 
appendices; (I) Checklist of Terres 
trial Breeding Vertebrates, (II) 
Checklist of Wintering Birds, and 
(Ill) Winter Bird Distribution Maps. 
The process used for the creation 

of most of the range maps started 
with the creation of a vegetation 
cover map derived from Landsat 
image interpretation. These vegeta 
tion cover types were then clustered 
into wildlife habitats based on 
habitation by similar groups of spe 
cies. A full-color 1 :750,000 scale Or 
egon Wildlife Habitat Map insert 
displays the habitat types and the 

Figure  1.  Great  Blue Heron 

52 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

\'egetation CO\'er boundaries. This 
m apping effort was p a rt of the Or 
egon Wildlife Habita t Gap analysis 
project. The habitat types were then 
overla id with geographic units of 
county, physiographic division, 
a nd a network of .+4 l equal-sized 
Environmental Monitoring and As 
sessment Program (E:vtAP) hexa 
gons coveri ng the state. The geo 
g raphic units conta ined  informa 
tion on presence o r absence of the 
s pecies based on bio logica l studies, 
museum records, a nd his to ri cal ob 
servations dating back to the jour 
nals of Lewis and Clark (180-1-
1806). This overlay process pro 
\'ided resultant range maps that 
were then reviewed by biologists, 
and whose input was used in carto 
g raphic fine-tuning of the final 
range maps. 

fig un•  2 . . \ 'ortha 11  l~il't'r Oller 

Because of the characteristics of 
the species habitat or the a\·ailable 
data, several methodologies were 
de,·eloped to crea tc selected species 
maps by either modifying the 
ranges derived from the modeling 
method m entioned '1bovc or by us 
ing an e ntirely different approach. 
Som e of the resultant maps from the 
modeling received C1dditional atten 
tion by including major hydro 
graphic features for species, like the 
northern ri,·er otter, that are closely 
associated with water, \•,:ith the h\; 
drograph~·  printed in '1  higher 
-
\'<l iue ink.  Other species such as 
the mallard duck or western pond 
turtle have a verv discontinuo us 
h<lbitat which is-denoted with a 
stippled area pattern for the range 
symbology. For marine bi rds a not 
to-scale buffer off the coast I ine was 
gencrnted to d ispl<ly their h<lbitat. 
Two introduced species- the big 

through each page uncomplicated. 
The complementary use of range 
maps, species drawings, and de 
scriptive text of micro-habitat con 
ditions on a single page to commu 
nicate probable places where a spe 
cies could be found, work very well 
together. The species d raw ings re 
ally help bring to life the atlas 
pages. With a little, o r for some a lot 
of, imagination a reader can close 
thei r eyes and actually see a belted 
kingfisher perched on a branch 
over the quick-moving upper Des 
chutes River, watching and waiting 
for its next meal, or possibly a west 
ern pond turtle basking in the sun 
on a mud bank above a small pond 
in the Willamette Valley. 

Interesting b ut less inspiring 
than the drawing a nd range map of 
the western pond turtle is the tie the 
atlas designers make between the 
atlas pages and the large-format 
Wildlife Habitat insert map. Stating 
which habitat type specifically is 
related to each species would have 
made a stronger connection. Even 
thou gh the data represented on the 
insert map is the basis for most of 
the range maps in  the a tlas, its pub 
lication with the Atlas appears to 
be a n afterthough t. Unlike the maps 
on the Atlas pages, the insert map 
could be characteriL:ed as a GIS 
a nalysis product, produced on a 
medium-resolution inkjet plotter. 
The 1:750,000 map des ign is lack 
ing in reference info rmation, only 
displaying the county boundaries 
in addition to the habitat and veg 
etation types. This map could have 
been a great add ition in  helping 
meet one of the purposes the au 
thors state: "They (the maps) can 
direct you to areas where field stud 
ies can determine if a species has 
fo und the right combination of 
habitat elements that enable it to es 
tablish and maintain a popula 
tion." Having little or no spatial ref 
erences diminishes its effective use 
as a location tool. Base GIS themes 
of major transportation, populated 
p laces and hydrography and eleva 
tion including shaded relief are 

Fis11rc  3.  Wc<ft>m  Po11d  Turtle 

ho rn s heep and wild turkey - are 
based o n maps directly from the 
ODFW using no GIS m odeling. 
Other species ra nges were modified 
w ith elevation data, for example, 
Townsend's m ole was elimina ted 
from the Coast Range. Som e of the 
rare species are represented as 
point symbols plotted at known lo 
ca lities,  the solitary sandpipe r h as 
o ne location. The mule deer and 
b lack-tailed deer are the onlv two 
subspecies that were mapp~d in the 
Atlas. The authors hand led this 
problem by using two different va l 
ues of ink, darker for east of the 
Cascades Range (mule deer) a nd 
lighter for west of the Cascades 
Range (black-tailed deer). 
The authors of this atlas truly need 
to be congratulated on successfully 
publishing in an easy-to-access and 
easy-to-use fo rmat a tremendous 
amount of geographic in formation 
system data on a subject of g reat 
inte rest to the Oregon public. In the 
introductio n, Csuti touches o n this 
basic function of the atlas, "While 
the information ga thered for GAP 
Ana lysis is m aintain ed as d igita l 
data in a geographic inform ation 
system, this atlas provides a larger 
audience 1,vith access to current 
knowledgcabou t Oregon'swild 
life." The OSU Press is a lready 
gearing up for a second printing, 
attesti ng to the popularity of the 
subject matter and the quick 
acceptance of the Atlas. 

The lc1yout and design of the 
pages is clean a nd easy to read. The 
use of tea l-colored ink for the title 
and subtitl e m akes naviga ting 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

cartographic perspectives 

53 

readily a\·ailable from the Oregon 
StateSer\'ice Center forGISand 
could ha\'e been added as a subtle 
background to help with location. 
As mentioned above there were 
actually several methods of compi 
lation for the range maps. The need 
for a legend on each map to help 
clarify these different compilation 
methods would have been an aid in 
understanding the meaning of the 
different symbologies used. For ex 
ample, the difference in the point 
symbols used in the solitary sand 
piper (location from a scientific re 
port) and the smooth general 
boundaries used for the big horn 
sheep (ODFW non-modeled range) 
in comparison to the \'erv detailed 
range boundaries gener~ted by the 
GIS modeling for the pronghorn are 
all very different in appearance but 
there is no legend to clarify the dif 
ferences. By studying the introduc 
tory text, an explanation of the 
,·ariation in symbology becomes 
clearer. 

I feel there is a need to point out 
a minor issue in the citation regard 
ing the first delineation of the 
physiographic di visions of Oregon. 
The author w rites that" The physi 
ographic provinces of Oregon were 
first delineated by Franklin and 
Dyrness (1973 ) ... ".Further search 
ing reveals that Franklin and 
Dyrness Vcgctntio11 of Orego11 a11d 
\ Va~/1i11gto11 (1969) cite Baldwin 
(1964) and Baldwin in Geology of 
Orcgo11 (1964) cites Dicken's Orcgo11 
GeogrnpliJt ''. .. The geology is dis 
cussed regionally following physi 
ographic diYisions outlined by 
Dicken (1955) ... " I hope future edi 
tions address this point. 

Beyond the few weak points just 
con?red the atlas is a great success. 
This atlas can be held up high as 
an e\.ample to many cartographers 
contemplating assembling a state 
\Vi Id life atlas. In a broader context, 
this atlas serves GIS professionals 
as an excellent example of making 
accessible to a large audience a 
complex GIS database that was 
originally generated for a special-

ized research and planning project. 
The citizens of Oregon are \'ery 
lucky to be the recipient of this com 
prehensive book. This atlas is an 
educational tool that could lead to a 
greater awareness and sensitivity 
among Oregon's human popula 
tion of the other inhabitants in their 
state. 

Note: To view the range map of 
the northern river otter you can go 
to the website <http: I I 
bufo.geo.orst.edu I brc/ temp> and 
open 111·ottrnap.g~f. It is also possible 
to obtain a copy of the map image 
through the ftp site 
<bufo.geo.orst.edu>, and log on as 
anonymous. Change directories to 
pub, and "get" either the com 
pressed tiff-for mat files, 
nrottmap.zip for PC users, or 
nrottmap.tif.gz for U:'-JIX users. 

I cartographic  techniques 

GIS Data Made Manageable for 
Cartographic Production 

Lo11is Cross I If 
Florida Rcsourn.?s & £1rl'iro11111e11tal 
A11alysis Cotter 
Florida Stnte U11iversity 
C220U U11iPersity Center 
Tallalinssee,  FL 32306-2641 
(850)  6.J.J-7361 
/cross@111a iler fsu .ed 11 

Background: 

The widespread adoption of Geo 
graphic Information Systems (GIS) 
technology by government agencies 
and the private sector has made 
\'ast quantities of digital data 
readily available to cartographers. 
Initially, the high cost of hardware 
and software, Im...- to medi u m qual 
ity graph ic output, and limited data 
sets made GIS less attractive to car 
tographers. The practice of scan 
ning and tracing output from GIS 
plots o r importing vector line work 
into graphi cs programs were the 

primary options offered to trans 
form GIS data into a computer for 
mat for the production of high-qual 
ity map products. Most cartography 
labs adopted the use of gra phic arts 
applications such as Adobe Ill us 
trator  or .\1acromedia Freehand ' 
as digital tools for map production. 
Even though these software pack 
ages were fu lly capable of import 
ing the points, lines, and polygons 
from the GIS, these programs could 
not take ad vantage of the useful at 
tribute information that is main 
tained in the GIS database. 

At the >JACIS XVI annual meet 
ing in San Antonio, many attendees 
were introduced to Avenza Soft 
ware, Inc.'s \1APub lisher  through 
a workshop.  The \1.APublisher 
software de\'elopers addressed the 
issue of maintaining the \'aluable 
attribute data and manipulation 
power of a GIS within Freehand or 
Illustrator. \1APub lisher version 
2.1incorporated38 filters designed 
to import \'ector and raster data 
with complete attribute tables intact 
fo r several major mapping software 
file formats: ESRI Arc View shape, 
ESRI ARC I INFO generate, Maplnfo 
mid / mif, USGSDLGandSDTS, 
AutoCAD DXF and geo-referenced 
TIFF and JPEG.  In addition to basic 
import capabi li ties, MA Publi sher 
enabled the user to change the na 
tive projection of the imported fi Jes 
and create supplementary graphic 
databases. 

In April of 1995, the Florida Re 
sources & Environmental Analysis 
Center (FREAC) began the second 
Water Resources Atlas tf Florida 
(WRAFJ. The editors and cartogra 
phers found that most of the data 
previously submitted by the au 
thors via hard-copy maps and 
tables were now maintained in ex 
tensive GIS data sets. MA Publisher 
performed beyond expectation 
when addressing these new data 
formats. All GIS points, li nes, and 
polygons were imported with the ir 
accompanying geographic accu 
racy and attribute tables withou t 
error. However, some obstacles be-

54 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

yond MAPublisher's control were 
discovered while importing GIS 
data. 

Often the data were far too de 
tailed for use within the atlas. The 
level of precision and number of 
points originally created in the GIS 
caused difficulty when importing 
files.  Freehand Ts internal limit of 
32,000 points, for example, restrict 
ed larger ARC I INFO coverages 
from being imported. The coastline 
files often required considerable 
simplification as the base maps in 
the WRAF were much more general 
ized. MAPublisherenabled queries 
to be performed separating data 
into useful groups. Attribute tables 
were created or edited within Free 
hand without having to edit in an 
external spreadsheet or database. 
Once the points, lines, and poly 
gons were imported, Free-hand's 
simplify [Xtrns!Cleanup!S.implifi;. .. ] 
routine was applied to remove un 
necessary points. The [ A111ou n t: 
0.25] was realized as the optimal 
level of simplification, eliminating 
the most points while maintaining 
path shape. MAPublisher's func 
tionality provided a means of 
streamlining the large GIS data set 
and making final maps more attrac 
tive and accurate. 

The follmving example illus 

trates how ~APublisher assisted in 
the construction of a graphic for the 
WRAF. The production was done 
using a 200 MHz Pentium Pro 
workstation "vi th 64MB RAM run 
ning Microsoft Windows NYE  4.0 
opera ting system software, ESRI 
Arc View' 3.0a, Macromedia Free 
hand 7.02, and A venza MA Pub 
lisher 2.1 application programs. 

Method: 

Note: all kevboard shortcuts are 
shown for the Windows I PC OS. 
for Mac OS use simply substitute 
the Command key for the Control 
key(Ctrl). 

For this example, three ARC / 
INFO export files (.eOO) were ac 
quired from the South Florida Wa-

ter Management District's plan 
ning/GIS division for a combined 
map.  The files included a south 
Florida coastline (sf_shoreline), 
1996-water quality data by hydro 
Iogic basin (complete_wq96) and 
point locations of hazardous waste 
sites (hazard) (FIGURE 1). 

Once imported into Arc View, the 
coverages were converted to shape-

Figure  1.  A r<Virn•  Dis11la.11 

MAPublisher I mporl 

AutoCC..D  DXF 
Maplnfo mid/mif 
USGS  DLG 
USGS  SOTS 

1 Defaults 

Page Anchor: 
X: 

Y: 

Scaling 1 to  J 

~---

MapAnchor: 
X:  r 
Y:  r 

Set  J 

Figure 2.  A.-IA P11/1/isl1cr  Import  Me1111 

files. It is good practice to keep the 
component parts of the shapefile 
(.shp, .shx, and .dbf) together as 
MAPublisher's built-in routines 
search for them when importing. 

Importing data through 

MAPublisher into Freehand was 
lluite straightforward. The import 
menu [Xtms!MAP11blisher/1111port ... ] 
offers the options in logical pull 
down menus (FIGURE 2). In addi 
tion to file format and feature type, 
the user must specify scale and 
page location for the element that is 
being imported. Within the pull 
down fields the interface offers con 
venient browsing capabilities to lo 
cate files. In order to maximize the 
image, the default scale can be se 
lected and the resulting image will 
fill the current page. for visual pur 
poses, this was found most useful 
in the WRAF, as the graphics were 
to be re-scaled to standard 
basemaps. 

To begin map construction, the 
shapefile of south Florida's coast-

£l 

r.'"  Line 

Area 

Select 

Angle: 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

cartographic perspectives 

55 

line was imported first for registra 
tion purposes and the establish 
ment of default values (FIGURE3). 
A search button complements the 
filename field of the menu making it 

F1x111-r  3.  lmpMtcd  Sliap,f ilc 

unnecessary to commit the "8-dot-
3" GIS filenames to memory. It is ef 
ficient to have each layer projected 
to the same coordinate system . 
Ho\·vever, re-projection of the data 
is possible using MAPublisher's 
projection editor [Ktras I MAPub 
lisher!Projectio11  Editor ... ]. Pull-

MAPublisher  Projection Editor 

With the three shapefiles im 
ported, it was determined that the 
individual types of waste sites and 
water quality values for the final 
map needed to be extracted. When 
the attribute tables of the imported 
shape files were examined, legend 
categories were established. The 
waste site coverage included three 
types of facilities: National Priority 
List (Superfund), state-funded, and 
landfills. Water quality was desig 
nated as either good, fair, poor or 
unknown. NlAPublisher'squery 
features [Xtms I MAP Select by At 
tribute ... ] enable the userto create 
selections using SQL type logic 
statements (FIGURES). Because 
this was the first query for the layer, 
lllitinl Selectio11 ... was chosen. AJ-

down menus give access to 119 dif 
ferent projections and 42 ellipsoids 
contained in the filter (FIGURE 4). 
This feature was not used because 
the files in the sample were all pro 
jected to state plane coordinates. 
Default values were chosen for the 
scale, page and map anchor fea 
tures so the data would be bound to 
the current page size.  MAPublisher 
creates and labels the new layer the 
filename of the import by default. 
This can be modified, but it was 
found that for file management pur 
poses, the default was preferred. 
For the waste site layer, the shnpefile 
format and paint feature type were 
specified. Once a file has been im 
ported, the scale in which it was 
brought in becomes an option from 
the pull-down field. Selecting Same 
as: sf_sl10reline commits the succes 
sive layers to the scale of that layer. 
This step is repeated until all of the 
shapefiles have been imported. It is 
recommended that all of the files be 
imported before any manipulation 
takes place. Premature resizing of 
an image or individual layer can 
result in inaccuracy. 

Input Parameters 

Projection 

Custom Elpsoid 

Parallels 

Projection: 

E~soict 

False Easting: 

False Northing: 

Central Meridian: 

Central Paralet: 

Figure  4.  i'v!AP11l1/1sher  Pn1iccticm  Editor  Mc1111 

Fig11re 5.  Attribute  Selectio11  Me1111 

£i 

though the user may enter an ex 
pression directly, pull-down fields 
simplify the task of creating an ex 
pression by using the attributes at 
tached to the imported file.  Once 
the C11rre11t Expression: included the 
necessary equation, INSERT was 
chosen transferring the formula to 
the recessed "expression area." 
Clicking OK completed the opera 
tion and returned the user to the 
document with the specified items 
selected (FIGURE 6 ). 

For map construction, the se 
lected elements can be modified for 
the cartographic presentation. It 
was found  that cloning and moving 
the selection to a new layer allowed 
the user to keep the original im 
ported file unaltered for further que 
ries and created a buffer for unfore 
seen error (FIGURE 7). Once the 
map was completed, the original 
layer was deleted. In addition to the 

56 

cartographic perspecti-ves 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

_,._, 
, .. • • P' ... ~-..-;~ 
Io,9w 

.... . . .. ..:-t'd 
, • ••  ...,,_-@' 
... . .   ju ::Jit 

··•fo·f')!M"·~ 
••llillBx•·llllJl'.-f 

Figure  8.  Find  and  Replace 

f1g11n'  6. Text  Elements  Sl'ic<"ft'd 

... . . .  ~~;:;_'!.  llf' 
... . . .  ·"··->i:_ 
: .... 
(~~- tl:f-': 

...... 
, •• !!!.IBIZ'-•I 
· · ·'""~ 

• • • 

• • ll!llF ,..,,,_,,u 
• · ll f·-1.;.  ,  J 

f1g 11re  9  Co111pleted  Import 

-·· 
...... ~ ...... ,_ .. ,,._ 

... . . .  ~~•:!. 

,,. 

.... . .. ..a.:•1."'•·· 
: ::~::-~.·~;-~· 
.. . .  r!] ~ ' -t-Oi<t, _ ' 
... . . .  .-:--.- r· • .L 

. ..  '  . .. . _...;l> 

· · ~ '>$.:~ 
.

··•'•"Q';-"'!I 
• • K•••1  ..-..i 

verted plus sign shape into the 
white box. Return to the document 
leaving the £i11d A11d Replace menu 
open by clicking anywhere in the 
document window. Create a path 
shape (a closed  p ath circle polygon 
was used for this example) on a 
new layer and copy it to the clip 
board. Return to the Eind And Re 
place menu and E.aste 111: the path 
shape for the To:  field. Clicking on 
Qiangeexecutes the replacement 
(FIGURE 8). Note: any unlocked layer 
co11tai11i11g the element to be cha11ged 
will be affected. The registration point 
for these e/e111e11ts is different i11  Free 
hand a11d Illustrator. 111  Freehand, it is 
the upper-left corner, while Illustrator 
uses the lower-left corner . 

The above s teps were repeated 
for both imported coverages resu !t 
ing in eight layers of discrete data 
(FIGURE 9). Once satisfied with the 
import, polygons were filled, line 
weights were changed and all of 
the layers grouped in preparation 
for refit to the atlas basemap. Due to 
the close fit of the imported laye rs to 

•. .,,..-. 

..;i :  ~- . 

Figure  7.  Ct>m>erkd  Pn//1  Slrnpc,; 

above technique, the efficient MAP 
Lcge11d fea ture can sepa rate e le 
ments while assigning legend infor 
mation and color based o n at 
tributes. 

MAPublisher imports GIS lines 

directly as vector line work; how 
ever, point symbo ls are imported as 
text plus sig ns. Freeha nd 7 can eas 
ily change the text to path shapes if 
these steps are followed: 

Select all of the text [Ctr/ A] and 
convert to paths [Ctr/ Shift P]. Select 
one of the converted path shapes 
and copy it to the clipboard [Ctr/ CJ. 
From the f.di t menu select £i11d A11d 
Replace, then choose Graphics ... 
[Cir/ Alt E]. The Attril111te: should be 
set to Path Shape and C/1a11ge /11 : 
sho u Id be set to Docu 111c11t. Clicking 
E.astc 111:  under Fro111:  inserts the con-

Water Quality and  Hazardous Waste  Sites 

L~sl 

I,.. 0-p-tl-o-ns-

.... a~ 
"'• a ~MAP...ti•she1 Import 
.... a  Guides 

-. 

watEf Quality 

ouni.nolflln 

0Poo r 

- , : Air 

-

Good 

Type of Site 

• 

• 

• 

L.1ndfill 

SU1~funded 

tbbl)nal Pr1 onty Ltsl 
(S up•nund) 

.YJ 

50 MI 

Fis111·,·  /0.  Finni  lvfnp 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

cartographic perspectives 

57 

the stand ard basemap for the 
WRAF,  it was milnua ll y resi zed. 
Title, scale and legend were added 
to the map to com plcte the g raphic 
(FIGURE 10). 

Conclusion: 

While MAPublisher did not directly 
affect the fin al look o f the published 
maps in the a tl as, it proved  to be in 
va luab le in conve rting the large 
quantities of data received for the 
preparation of maps into a useable 
fo rm . The final maps are primarily 
the result of cartographic d esign de 
cisions and the  functions of the 
gra phics software, but MAPub 
lishcr contributed significantl y in 
severa l \.vays.  First, the final printed 
maps are much more accurate in 
the geographic location of features 
due to the use of detailed GIS data. 
Second, the abi lity to take data sets 
from multiple sources and re 
project them to a comm on projec 
tion allows the cartographe r to 
combine Javers and create custom 
maps. Finally, the timeand cost 
savings from using this alternative 
method were esscntia I to the 
com p letion of the project in a timely 
manner. In m an y ins tances, the al 
ternative \·1.:oul d have been to take 
printed output from theGIS, m anu 
ally trace the line work in a  more 
generalized form, scan the image, 
and retrace the line work in Free 
hand. 

The utilization of MAPublisher 
for this project a nd the techniques 
that were developed that led to the 
production of fina l printed color 
maps has enhanced the ability of 
FREAC cartographers to produce 
high-quality maps for publication 
th at are m ore acc urate and more 
cost effective. More information 
about MAPublishcr can be fou nd 
on the website: bliJ2.;.il 
w\vw.avenza.com. 

Note:  Full screc111 1crsicms of the graph 
ics cn11  liefo1111d nt http:!! 
128.186.177.25/nrt iclc.'11111! 

map  library 
ulletin board 

-~-

T h e Louis iana S tate U n iversity 
Cartographic In form atio n Center 

/0'111 M. A11derso11 
Mnp Librnrin11 mrd Director 
Cnrtogrnphic l11for111ntio11 Ce11ter 
Dept. of Geogrnplry &  A11tlrropology 
Lo11isin11a Stale U11ivcrsity 
(504)  388-6247 
jm1ders@ls11t 1111.s11cc.ls11.ed 11 
Ir ttp:llwww.cadgis.ls11.ed 11/cic! 

The Louisiana Sta te Universi ty Car 
tographic Information Center (CIC) 
is a significant resea rch resource in 
the Gulf South region. The Center's 
collection containing over 280,000 
maps and 81,000 aerial photo 
graphs makes it the largest m ap col 
lectio n  in  Louisiana and ranks it 
am o ng the larger academic map li 
braries in the Cnited States.  In ad 
dition to the many m a ps and  aerial 
photographs, the collection in 
clud es several regionally unique 
cartog raphic resources wh ich a re 
ava ilable to the Uni ve rsity commu 
nity, s tate and local agencies, busi 
ness and pri vate patrons,  as well as 
patrons fro m around the world. 

The Ca rtographic Information 
Cen-ter is funded and staffed by the 
De-partmentofGeography&An 
thropology and is ad min is tratively 
and  physically separate from the 
LSU Libraries. The CIC collection is 
com p rised of materials in two cate 
gories distinguished by ownership. 
The majority of the material in the 
collection was acqu ired by LSU 
geoscience departments and is now 
owned by th e Department of Ge 
ograph y & Anth ropology. Addi 
tionally, the CIC houses materials 
deposited by the Army Mapping 
Service a nd the Federal Depository 
Library Program. 

Although the Cartogra phic Infor 
mation Center dates its founding to 
1960, the collection is the product of 

both a broad scope of current scho l 
arsh ip and the ri ch seventy-year 
hi story of geoscience research at 
LSU. The DepartmentofGeography 
& Anthropo logy collection reflects 
the department's teaching and re 
sea rch focus by concentrating o n 
acq uiring maps d epicting historica l 
and current Louisiana, the Gulf 
South, Latin America (with particu 
lar emphasis o n Mexico), East Asia, 
and Europe.  The specific research 
subjects s upported by the collection 
include his to rical, cultural, eco 
nomic and physical geograph y, an 
thropology, coastal a nd fluvia l geo 
morphology, and geology. The re 
g io nally unique m aterials in the De 
partment collection include the 
largest collection of original Louisi 
ana Sanborn Fi re Insurance maps 
o utside of Wash ington, DC the 
most complete set of historic U .5. 
Coast& Geod etic Survey h ydro 
g raphic and topog raphic charts of 
the  Lou isiana Gulf Coast housed  in 
the region, copies of historic maps 
depicting Louisiana, and historic 
aerial p hotographs of Louisiana 
da ting fro m  the 1930s to the 1980s. 
Among the uniqu e materials cov 
ering areas outside of Louisiana is 
a nea rly complete set of o ri g inal 
U.S. Geological Su rvey topographic 
quadrangle maps printed before 
1940. In addition to m aps of the 
United States, the scope of geo 
science research at LSU O\'er the 
past seventy yea rs has brought ma 
terials d epicting areas outsid e of 
the U.S. to the CIC. One examp le is 
a collection of over 3000 large scale 
(1 :50,000) topog raphic maps of 
Mexico " ·hich provides over 96% 
coverage of the country. In addition 
to ca rtographic materials, the CIC 
ho uses the Dr. Robert C. West Latin 
American photograph collection 
containing over 6,000 black & white 
photographs and  the Dr. Robert C. 
West Slide Collection of over 10,000 
s lides from around the wo rl d. 

Complementing the material 
amassed by the geoscience depart 
m ents are the Army Mapping Ser 
vice depository material from the 

58 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

1950s and  1960s and the current 
Government Printing Office Federal 
Depository Library Program 
(FDLP). The current FDPL material 
is located in the CIC as provided in 
the Separate Housing Agreement 
with the Regional Depository Li 
brary located in the LSU main li 
brary.  The combination of the 
Army Mapping Service maps and 
the current FDLP arrivals provides 
world wide medium scale topo 
graphic map coverage as well as 
small to large scale map coverage of 
the United States. 

The Cartographic Information 
Center operates as a closed-stacks 
library. The staff consists of one full 
time professional assisted by a 1 
Full Time Equivalent student staff 
who retrieve materials in response 
to patron requests.  In calendar year 
1997 the staff served 723  walk-in 
patrons who requested the retrieval 
of a total of 1120 maps and 658 
aerial photographs.  Other patron 
services include locating and rec 
ommending digital data sources, 
geographic names research, and 
suggesting map vendors for private 
purchases.  These service requests 
are received from walk-in patrons 
as well as via telephone, fax, mail, 
and e-mail. 

In addition to providing daily 
patron service, the Cartographic In 
formation Center staff is working to 
overcome problems common to 
many map libraries such as inad 
equate space, the need for retro 
spective cataloging, and preserva 
tion. As with other map libraries, 
the most pressing problem is inad 
equate space.  The recently imple 
mented weeding program designed 
to remove duplicate out-of-scope 
materials has barely kept pace with 
normal acquisitions. I\'aturally, 
once the weeding is completed, nor 
mal acquisitions \viii soon fill  the 
recently available space. Addition 
ally, the acquisition of several large 
research collections is pending un 
til additional space is available.  It 
is hoped that additional space will 
be acquired in the next three years. 

In general, access to collection 

materials is primarily provided 
through index maps for series, 
while other local finding aides are 
consulted for individual maps. In 
addition, the FDLP materials are 
piece-level cataloged in the LSU Li 
braries LOLA online catalog avail 
able at http: /  / www.lib.lsu.edu / da 
tabases / Iola.html. The Department 
of Geography & Anthropology col 
lection materials are classified and 
filed using a locally developed sys 
tem. An effort is underway to create 
electronic databases to improve ac 
cess to the departmental material. 
Completed databases are available 
locally for the Dr. Robert C. West 
Latin American Photograph Collec 
tion, as well as for the map hold 
ings depicting Louisiana, :vlexico, 
and the West Indies. The work on 
databases for the Dr. Robert C. West 
Slide Collection, and for maps de 
picting the United States is under 
\vay.  The pre-1940 U.S. Geological 
Survey topographic quadrangle 
map indexes were completed in 
1997. 

Because the material in the De 
partment of Geography & Anthro 
pology collection res ults from the 
long history of LSC geoscience 
teaching and research, these materi 
als are often old, fragile, and require 
preservation. In the past, original 
maps as well as copies of historic 
maps were acquired. As a result, 
map materials in the collection 
range from acetate-based film nega 
tives to fragile newsprint. Addition 
ally, the bulk of the collection is 
housed in acidic containers. A re 
cently completed major preserva 
tion project involved the transfer of 
historic U.S. Coast & Geodetic Sur 
vey chart images from decomposing 
acetate film negatives to stable 
mylar. Currently, an ongoing pres 
ervation effort is underway to pre 
vent daily wear on fragile maps by 
removing the maps from the general 
collection, rehousing them in pH 
buffered containers, and placing 
them in less trafficked drawers. 

In addition to the daily map li 
brary duties of patron service and 
processing acquisitions, and the 
long term rehousing, retrospective 
cataloging, and preservation efforts, 
the CIC staff is promoting aware 
ness of the Cartographic Informa 
tion Center's collection through 
tours, class presentations, and the 
World Wide Web. The Center's 
web site, www.cndgis.lsu .edrilcicl, 
was established in November 1995 
to provide an overview of the hold 
ings. Although the majority of the 
CIC holdings are not in an online 
catalog, the web site does list the 
CIC's significant special collections 
and map series.  When the map da 
tabase for a specific area is comple 
ted, a paragraph describing the 
map holdings is added to the web 
site. In addition to the descriptive 
paragraphs and map series listings, 
a complete list of Louisiana historic 
aerial photographic coverage by 
parish and year is provided. A com 
panion list of the CIC's holdings of 
aerial photomosaics by county and 
year depicting states other than 
Louisiana is also available. Finally, 
in order to illustrate the aerial pho 
tograph collection's scope, six rep 
resentative aerial photos taken of 
the LSU campus from the 1930s to 
the 1980s are on the web site. 

The Cartographic Information 

Center is located in room313 
Howe-Russell Geoscience Complex, 
LSU Campus, Baton Rouge, LA 
70803 and is open to the public 
from8:00 a.m. to4:30 p.m . week 
days except University holidays. 

The University of Iowa's Map 
Collection 

Mary Mel 11 roy 
Gouem 111en t Pu/11 icntio11s Dcpart111e11t 
and Map Co/lectio11 
U11 iversi ty of Imm Libraries 
Iowa  City,  IA 52242-1420 
(319)335-6247  or (319)335-5926 
FAX: (319)335-5900 
e-mail: 111ary-111ci11 roy@uiowa.cd11 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

cartographic perspectives 

59 

The University of Iowa's Map Col 
lection is the largest map collection 
in Iowa,  with m o re than 176,000 
shee t m aps, as well as: copies of 
Sanborn fire  insurance maps for 
more than 1,000 Iowa cities from 
the 1870's throug h  the  1930's, either 
on pape r or microfiche; Iowa 
county atlases for the period from 
th e 1870's to the  l 930's on micro 
film; over 600 Iowa plat books; and 
more th an  100,000 aerial photos o f 
Iowa counties, for vario us vea rs 
since the 19-lO's. Altho ugh -stron 
gest in Iowa and Mid'vvestern mate 
rials, the collectio n  is inte rnati ona l 
in scope and ~ubject coverage is 
broad, excl uding o nly geologic 
maps, \vhich are collected at the Ge 
o logy Library. 

Until ,1pproximately three years 
ago, th ere were no electronic carto 
graphic products in the Map Col 
lectio n . When l joined the collection 
in 1995 as half-time Map Librarian, 
I brought with me an interest in 
desk-top mapping capabilities. I 
had worked with federa l docu 
ments for manv \'ears and knew of 
the wealth of r{u~eric data in the 
documents department. I had also 
received training  in 1992 on 
ArcView as part of th e ARL/GIS 
Literacy Project, and had been us 
ing a stand-alone copy of Arc View 
in the Government Publications De 
partment. Thus, t he Map Co llectio n 
began acqui ring cast-off CD-ROM 
d ri vcs from o ther 1 ibrary depart 
ments and so me fairly s imple CD 
ROM m app ing products (e.g., Map 
Expert, Pro,imity). The Map Collec 
tion s till did not have anv hard 
ware to run highe r end mapping 
programs, until a series of events 
changed our situation for the better. 
First, the libr<H\' was "wired" in 

the spring of 1997, enabling Map 
Collection machines to access the 
outside world. Then with  the assis 
tance of supportive library admin is 
trators, we utiliLed library d evelop 
men t fun ds, money from the library-
92s collection development genera l 
fund, some of m y own map collec 
tion fund s, p lu s" d onated CPU 

from another library on campus, 
and were able to purchase very ad 
equate hardware to run Arc View 3. 
A t that point, Arc V iew was relo 
ca ted  from d ocume nts to the Map 
Collection to run on the new ma 
chine. Las tly, the Map Collection 
obtained  funding  in late 1997 for 
two more desktop mapping work 
stations throu g h fund s designated 
by the Univers ity's Office of the Pro 
\'OSt for instru ctio nal technology 
enhancements. Thus, b y the end of 
1998, the Map Collection will be 
running desktop mapping software 
o n three networked machines in the 
Map Collection-92s reading room. 
Because of the networked environ 
ment, the m achines \-vill be linked  to 
each other and to a color laser 
printer also purchased with the 
technology enhancement funding . 
We can also ex pl o re additional li 
brary access for ArcView, since we 
have a library s ite license for 
ArcView. 

I have consciously used  the 
phrase "desktop mapping," rath er 
than GIS in this a rticle. At this 
point, the goa l of placing these ma 
chines and software in the Map 
Collection is to g ive patrons access 
to higher-end m apping tools to 
which they o therwi se \-Vould not 
ha ve had  access. The University of 
Iowa has severa l true GIS labor~to­
ries on campus, loca ted in aca 
demic d epa rtments, where stud ents 
enrolled in genernl education / in 
troducto ry classes ca n utilize vari 
ou s GIS software prod u cts. When 
many of th ese stud ents finish tak 
ing these types of courses in geogra 
phy, etc., they will not have access 
to the d epa rtm ental labs and to 
electroni c mapping capabilities in 
general. After speaking w ith profes 
so rs, s tude nts, and o the r librarians 
at ALA and elsewhere, it seemed 
more u seful to focus this beg inning 
servi ce in the Map Collection to  
ward those s tude nts (and faculty) 
whose main needs can be met by 
m apping programs s uch as 
Arc View and Maptitude. 

As yo u can see, the pa th to get 
ting the three machines was not 
clear-cut, the  results came to us in 
phases, but the focus audience was 
always the sam e. The administra 
to rs at the Univers ity Libraries are 
very suppo rtive of h aving desktop 
m apping capabilities in the  Map 
Collection. We had earlier made 
larger requ ests to university offices 
for machinery and software for this 
service and h ad  a lways been re 
jected. Thus, the piece-meal ap 
proach was begun, and it paid off. 
!'\ow time must be devoted to w rit 
ing policies, creating templates and 
pre-designed maps, hunting for tu 
torials, grappling with levels of ser 
vice, finding s taff time for this new 
service, and even fi g uring out how 
these large machines will fit into the 
s pace available. But had we no t 
been wi lling to pre-define our audi 
ence and to advance our cause 
g rad u all y, I believe we would still 
be waiting for o ur first desktop 
mapping station in the Map Collec 
tion. 

[_  NACISn~ 

1997-98 NACIS OFFICERS AND 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

NACIS OFFICERS: 

President: Pa tricia Gilmartin 
Department of Geography 
Uni ve rsity of South Carolina 
Columbi a, SC 29208 
(803)777-2989  fax:  (803)777-4972 
e-mail: g ilmartin-pa t@sc.ed u 
Term ex pi res: October 98 

Vice President: Cynthia Brewer 
Department of Geography 
Pennsylvania State Uni\'ersity 
University Park, PA 16802-5011 
(81-1)863-5072  fax:  (814)863-7943 
email : cbrewer@essc.psu.edu 
Term expires: October 98 

The North American Cartographic Information Society 
(NACIS) was founded in 1980 in response to the need for a multidisciplinary 
organization to facilitate communication in the map information commu 
nity.  Principal objectives of NACIS are: 

§ to promote communication, coordination, and cooperation 
among the producers, disseminators, curators, 
and users of cartographic information; 

§ to support and coordinate activities with other professional 
organizations and institutions involved with 
cartographic information; 

§ to improve the use of cartographic materials through 
education and to promote graphicacy; 

§ to promote and coordinate the acquisition, preservation, 
and automated retrieval of all types of cartographic material; 

§ to influence government policy 
on cartographic information. 

NACIS is a professional society open to specialists from private, academic, 
and  government  organizations  throughout  North  America.  The  society 
provides an opportunity for Map Makers, Map Keepers, Map Users, Map 
Educators, and Map Distributors to exchange ideas, coordinate activities, 
and improve map materials and  map use.  Cartographic Perspectives, the 
organization' s Journal, provides a mechanism to facilitate timely dissemina 
tion of cartographic information to  this diverse  constituency.  It includes 
solicited feature articles, synopses of articles appearing in obscure or non 
cartographic publications, software reviews, news features, reports (confer 
ences, map exhibits, new map series, government policy, new degree pro 
grams,  etc.),  and  listings  of  published  maps  and  atlases,  new  computer 
software, and software reviews. 

FREAC 
Florida State University 
Tallahassee, FL 32306-2641 

NONPROFIT ORG. 
U.S. POSTAGE 
PAID 
TALLAHASSEE, FL 
PERMIT NO.  55 

60 

cartographic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

Jeremy Crampton (10 /99) 
Department of Geography 
George Mason University 
Fairfax,  VA  22030-4444 
(703)993-1217 
email: jcrampto@gmu.edu 

Valerie Krejcie (10 I 98) 
4020 Kirk St. 
Skokie, IL 60076 
(847)677-1881 
email: t-krejcie@nwu.edu 

James E.  Meacham (10/99) 
Department of Geography 
1251  L'niversity of Oregon 
Eugene, OR 97403-1251 
(541 )346-4870  fax:  (541 )346-2067 
jmeacham@oregon.uoregon.edu 

Elizabeth  elson (10/99) 
DepartmentofGeography 
San Diego Sta te University 
San Diego, CA 92182-4..+93 
( 619 )594-8560 
emai l: nelson16@mail.sdsu.edu 

Thomas Patterson (10/98) 
:\lational Park Service 
Harpers Ferry Center 
P.O. Box 50,  Publications 
Harpers Ferry, WV 25425 
(304 )535-6020  FAX:  (304 )535-6144 
ema il: t_patterson@nps.gov 

Joseph Stoll (10/98) 
Dept. of Geog. & Planning 
University of Akron 
306 Ca rroll  Hall 
Akron, OH 44325-5005 
(330)972-7621 
email: joestoll@uakron.edu 

Kathryn Thorne (10/98) 
Dept. of Geography & Geology 
Belknap Hall 
Mansfield University 
Mansfield, PA 16901 
(717)662-4612  fax:  (717)662-4612 
email: kthorne@mnsfld.edu 

Secretary:JamesO. \!linton 
Map Library 
University of Tennessee 
15  Hoskins 
Knoxville,  TN 37996-4066 
(423)97-l-4315  fax:  (..+23)974-0560 
email: jim-minton@utk.edu 
Term expires: October 99 

Treasurer: Sona Andrews 
Univ. of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 
P.O. Box 413 
Milwaukee, WI 53201 
(-ll-1)229-6057  fax:  (414)229-2-181 
email: sona@csd.uwm.edu 
Term expires: October98 

Past-President: Michael Peterson 
Dept. of Geography / Geology 
University of Nebraska-Omaha 
Omaha,  NE 68182 
(402)554-..+805  fax:  (-102)55-l-3518 
email: geolib@cwis.unomaha.edu 
Term expires: October98 

NACIS EXECUTIVE OFFICERS: 

Chris topher Baruth 
A GS Collection 
P.O. Box 399 
Milwaukee, WI 53201 
(800)558-8993  fax:  (-11-1)229-3624 
FAX:  (-l14) 229-3624 
email: cmb@csd.uwm.edu 

Sona Andrews 
L'niv. of Wiscons in-Milwaukee 
P.O. Box 413 
\!lilwaukee, WI 53201 
(..+14)229-6057  fax:  (4 14)229-2-181 
e ma il :sona@csd. uwm.edu 

Susan Peschel 
AGS Collection, P.O. Box 399 
Milwaukee, WI 53201 
(800)558-8993  fax : (-114)229-362-l 
email:sqp@gml.lib.uwm.edu 

NACIS BOARD Of DIRECTORS: 

Gregory H. Chu  (10 /99) 
Dept. of Geog. and Earth Science 
Univ. of Wisconsin-La Crosse 
LaCrosse, 'NI 54601 
(608)785-6675  fa"<:  (608)785-8332 
email :chu@mail.uwlax.edu 

NACIS Board Meeting 
January 10, 1998 
Lexington, KY 

Present: Andrews, Baruth, Brewer, 
Chu, Crampton, Gilmartin, Krejcie, 
Meacham, Minton, Nelson, 
Patterson, Peschel, Peterson, Stoll, 
and Thorne. 

Michael Peterson recognized Pat 

Gilmartin as the newl y-elected 
President of  ACIS and turned 
over the meeting to her. Gilmartin 
ca lled the Board to order and wel 
comed the newly-elected officers: 
Cynthia Brewer (Vice President), 
and James Minton (Secretary) and 
new Board members: Greg Chu, 
Elizabeth !'\elson, Jim Meacham, 
and Je remy Crampton. Continuing 
Board members are: Peterson, 
Thorne, Patterson, Krejcie, and 
Stoll. Sona Andrews continues as 
Treasurer.  Gilmartin a lso thanked 
Peterson for hi s hard work as im 
mediate past President, Craig 
Remington for his work as Secre 
tary and the out-going Board mem 
bers for their service: Jim Anderson, 
Barbara Buttenfield, and Glen 
Pawclski. NACIS executi veofficers 
are: Sona Andrews, Susan Peschel, 
and Chris Baruth. 

Cartographic Perspectives 

CP Editorial Board reported on 
the progress of searching for a new 
edi tor. They recommended dis 
banding the three-year rotation. A 
guest editor would be responsible 
for one issue per year. Mike 
Peterson vol unteered his name as 
editor for a threevearterm effective 
Fall /Winter1998. With Peterson 
absent, the Board moved, seconded, 
and discussed  the appointment. 
The vote was unanimous in sup 
port of Peterson to assume the role 
of Editor. 

FurtherCP Ne.,,vs: Jim Ackerman 
and Jeremy Crampton have already 
volunteered tobefutureguestedi 
tors. Joanne Perry will assume role 
of Book Review Editor with assis 
tance. Several names were sug-

Number 29, Winter 1998 

cartograpllic perspectives 

61 

gested for CP Editorial Board. 
Buttenfield offered to send flyers to 
encourage con tributions to CP. Mo 
tion was made, seconded, dis 
cussed and appron?d by the Board. 
It was no ted  that CP is getting 
very close to the page limits for con 
sideration of moving to Perfect 
Binding. This move \Nould cost an 
additional $120.00 for every addi 
tional four pages. 

Meeting Site For Year 2000 

An open discu ssion was he ld 
proposing se,·eral potential sites for 
I\ ACIS 2000. Members are encour 
aged to propose host institutions 
and sites and offer them to the 
Board for consideration. Submitting 
sites shou ld  consider a host depart 
ment such as geology, geography, 
or GIS lab. Other issues to consider 
are hotel and air fare costs. Cities 
suggested were: Las Vegas, Cleve 
land, Omaha, Kansas City, Port 
land or Eugene, OR, San Diego, 
KnoX\'ille, and Saratoga Springs, 
l\Y. 

Membership Committee 
Issue was rabed concerning "regu 
lar student," "subscription," and 
"affiliate" memberships. O ther is 
sues relating to membership: The 
establishment of a Bu lletin Board 
(electronic), mailings to GIS, carto 
special interest groups (such as 
URJSA). 

WEB Committee 
Jeremy Crampton offered tocha ir a 
Web(\\'\\'W-type)Committee.Such 
a site would cost about 525 per 
month. Crampton and the Board 
will explore this issue further. 
Baruth offered to work '"'·ith the 
Committee and the possibility of 
moving UWM's "LeMdo" to the 
Web. Parts of the pages could in 
clude: NACISorgani1ation/ offic 
ers, annual meetings, parts of er. 
The Boa rd wi 11  re-assess at the 
spring meeting. 

Spring Board Meeting 
Peterson noted that the experience 
with a telephone conference call for 
the Board meeting did not work 
well. Gilmartin asked fo r suggested 
meeting sites. Atlanta, Chicago, Las 
Vegas, and Da I las were offered. 
Gilmartin will determine best si te 
and  notify me mbers in early 1998. 

New Business 
Rowles mentioned an idea of giving 
plaques to students who assist in 
the annual conference. She also 
noted that AAG meets March 24th-
29th,  1998. 

Sub111itted, 
f i111 MillfOll 
NACISSccretnry 

fro111  tlic N ACIS Prcside11t 
co11ti1111edfro111pnge1 

board. In reality, Mike had been an 
obvious choice a ll along, but it just 
took a little tim e to convince him . 
Mike has done an o utstanding job 
for a number of years as chair of the 
editorial board, and I have no doubt 
tha t he will continue his exemplary 
work as editor. I would like to 
thank Mike for accepting this re 
s ponsibility and to remind every 
one else that we can make his life 
as-ed itor easier by sending him 
more good manuscripts to consider 
for publication in CP. 

T he next reason I can enjoy serv 
ing as president of \JACIS is the tre 
mendous job done by our E"ecutive 
Officers at CW-Milwaukee: Chris 
Baruth, Sona Andrews, and Susan 
Peschel.  ACIS members may get 
tired of hearing this same refrain 
from every president, but the reason 
we sound like a broken record is be 
cause these three make the presi 
dent's job such a ... \veil, ... a~ 
sure. They m aintain our records 
and mailing lists, collect d ues, man 
age many of the arrangements for 
the ann ua l con ference, and ha ndle 
innumerable other details. The con-

tinuity and e'\perien ce provided by 
Chris, Sona, and Susan form a 
s tro ng infras tructure for ;\IACJS 
which is in val uable to its offi cers, 
board members, and m embership. 
After a well-attended and infor 
ma ti ve annual meeting in Lexing 
ton last fall, we are looking forward 
to getting together again this year in 
Milwaukee (October 7 - 10). Dr. 
Cvnthia Brewer is Vice President 
a~d Program Chair this year. If you 
have questions or suggestio ns 
about the annual conference, you 
can reach Cindy a t 
cbrewer@essc.psu.edu (or at the De 
partment of Geography, Penn Sta te 
University, University Park, PA 
16802). The usual Call for Papers 
and details of the meeting will be 
mailed out la ter this spring, but it is 
not too early to be thinking about 
attending and participating in the 
meeting. 

This year's ann ual meeting will 

be preceded by a full-day sympo 
sium on the topic of "Maps and 
Minds: A History of Cartography in 
Geography Ed u cation. " Organized 
by Ja mes R. Ackerman of the 
Hermon Dunlap Smith Center for 
the History of Cartography a t 
Chicago's :\lewberry Library, the 
symposium will feature si" to eight 
invited speakers who will examine 
the de\'elopment and use of maps 
in Western educatio n and publica 
tions from the sixteenth through the 
twentieth centuries. This sympo 
sium , which h as been severa l yea rs 
in the planning, constitutes a rare 
opportunity to reflect on the interac 
tion between ca rtographic publica 
tion and societies' edu ca tio nal pri 
orities. Look for details in the Call 
for Papers for the annual meeting 
and on our website at 
www.nacis.org. 

Yes, 1998 is a good year to be 

president of NACIS, mainly be 
cause of the admirable s upport pro 
vided by current and past officers of 
the organization. I invite you to join 

ACIS (if you are not already a 
member), renew your membership 
(if you are la te wi th your dues), and 

62 

cartograpl1ic perspectives 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

participate (if you have been lurk 
ing in the wings). I can assure you 
that you will enjoy the results. 

Pat Grl111nrti11 
Presidc11t, NACIS 

L  submissions 

The editors of Cnrtogrnp/1ic Per~pcc­
ti7.1e.;; welcome manuscript submis 
sions. Please follow these guide 
lines. 

FEATURED PAPERS 
Each issue of Cnrtogrnplric Perspl'C 
tii.•es includes featured papers, 
which are refereed articles report 
ing original work of interest to 
NACIS'sdiversemembcrship. Pa 
pers ranging from theoretical to ap 
plied topics arc welcome. Prospec 
ti\·e authors are encouraged to sub 
mit manuscripts to the Editor. Pa 
pers may also be solicited by the 
Editor from presenters at the an 
nual meeting and from other 
sources. Ideas for special issues on 
a single topic arc also encouraged. 
Papers should be prepared c'clu 
sively fo r publication in CP,  with 
no major portion previously pub 
lished elsewhere. All contributions 
will be reviewed by the Editorial 
Board, whose members will advise 
the Editor as to \vhethcr a manu 
script ic; appropriate for publica 
tion. Final publication decisions 
rest with the Editor, who reserves 
the right to make editorial changes 
to ensure clarity and consistency of 
stvle. 

REVIEWS 
The Book Review Editor, Joanne M. 
Perry, will solicit reviews of books 
and atlases. Publications are to be 
sent directly to Joanne M. Perry, 
Map Librarian, The Valley Library-
121, Oregon State University, 
Corvallis, Oregon 97331-4501 or 

perryj@ccmail.orst.edu. Reviews of 
maps and mapping software will 
be solicited by the Editor of CP. Pro 
spective reviewers are invited to 
contact the Editor directly at 
geolib@unomaha.edu. 

CARTOGRAPHICTECHNIQUES 
Articles that concern all aspects of 
map design and production are so 
licited by the Cartographic Tech 
niques Editor, James E. Yleacham, 
Director, lnfoGraphics Lab, Depart 
ment of Geography, University of 
Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1251 or 
jmeacha m@oregon.uoregon.cd u. 

MAP LIBRARY BULLETIN 
BOARD 
The \1ap Library Bulletin Board 
Editor, Melissa Lamont, solicits re 
ports on the current status of map 
libraries. Submission~ are to be sent 
directly to Melissa Lamont, Data Li 
brary, Mclean Laboratory, Woods 
Hole Oceanographic Institution, 
\.VHOI Mail Stop 8, Woods Hole, 
MA 025-13 or mlamont@whoi .edu. 

TECH N ICAL GUIDELINES 
FOR SUBMISS ION 
Literature cited shou ld conform to 
the Chicago Ma nua l of Style, 14th 
ed., University of Chicago Press, 
Chapter 16, style "B." Examples of 
the correct citation form appear in 
the feature articles of th is issue. 
Authors of Featured Papers should 
submit four printed copies of their 
manuscript for review directly to 
Michael Peterson, Editor of Cnrto 
grnplric Perspectil'es, Department of 
Geography / Geology, University of 
Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, Ne 
braska 68182.  Manuscripts are re 
viewed by three referees. The Editor 
will contact all authors to notify 
them if their paper has been ac 
cepted for publication and if revi 
sions are necessary prior to publi 
cation. The following technical 
guidelines should be followed for 
all accepted manuscripts (these 
guidelines also apply to book, map, 
and software reviews). 

Material should be submitted in 
digital form on 3.5" diskettes. Please 
send a paper copy along with the 
disk. Text documents processed 
with \1acintosh or Windows soft 
ware, such as WordPerfect or MS 
Word, are preferred. 

PostScript graphics generated 
with Adobe ll/ 11strntor or Mncromcdin 
frceHn11d for the Macintosh I Win 
dows or Corel Draw for Windows 
computersarepreferred, butge 
neric PICT or TIFF format graphics 
files are usua lly compatible as well. 
EPS format graphics should in 
clude only the graphic with no fig 
ure caption. Graphics may be sub 
mitted on disk, placed on an FTP 
site, or sent to ftpnt.freac.fsu.edu. 
Manually produced graphics 
should be no larger than 11by17 
inches, designed for scanning at 
600 dpi resolution (avoid fine 
grained tint screens). Continuous 
tone photographs will also be 
scanned. 

Text and graphic files should be 

sent to: \1 r. Jam es R. Anderson, 
Asst. Editor, FREAC, UCC 2200, 
Florida State University, Tallahas 
see, FL 32306-2641; (850) 644-2883, 
fax:  (850)  644-7360; 
email: ja nderso@mailer.fsu.edu 

Special thanks to the following 
individuals who have made 
donations to c.artographic Per 
spectives. 

Kevin Byrne 
William Gennetti 
John Hutchinson 
E.L. Lanzer 
Joseph Poracsky 
David Woodward 

) 

NEW NACIS WEB SITE 

www.nacis.org  __/ 

Number 29, Winter 1998 

cartographic perspectives 

63 

NACIS membership form 

North  American  Cartographic  Information  Society 
Sociedad  de  Informacion  Cartografica  Norte  Americana 

Name I Nombre: 

Address/ Direcci6n: 

O rganization I Afiliaci6n profesional: 

Your position / Posici6n: 

Ca rto graphic interests I In te reses ca rtog ra ficos: 

Professional memberships I Socio de organizaci6n : 

Membership Fees for the Calendar Year*/ 
Valor de n6mina de socios para el afio: 
Individual / Regular:  $42.00  U.S. / E.U. 
Students I Estudiantes:  $20.00 U.S. IE. U. 
Institutional I Miembros  institucionales: 
$72.00 U.S./E.U. 

Make all checks payable to/ 
Manden sus cheques a: 
NACIS 
AGS Collection 
P.O. Box 399 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin  53201 

*Membership fees include subscription to Cartograplt ic Perspectives . 

I 

-

-

